---

layout: post-journal
title: Iceland
date:   2015-03-26 09:00:11
tag: 
categories: travels
excerpt: The Land of Ice and Fire
permalink: /iceland
comments: true

---

24th March - 


**Day 0**

This was my first sight of Iceland


The winds at the desolate Keflavic airport were lashing at us as if it were the end of the world. We rented a car and made our way to our AirBnB.

We met our host, who spoke in the amusing Icelandic accent. We made him pronounce [Eyaflatjokull](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eyjafjallaj%C3%B6kull).

----

**Day 1**

We did the Golden Cicle.

I lost my phone when doing the Golden Circle, and only realized near the end of the trip. Finding it seemed like a lost cause when we returned to our AirBnB.   I played the events of the previous day in my mind, and deduced, that I must have dropped the phone at a bridge and river crossing where we had stopped for photography - and no whereelse. I convinced the team to drive there again. It had snowed overnight, so there was still little hope of finding it. Manan was trying my phone all this time, and on our way back, it rang and someone picked it up. Someone had found it at the spot we were looking it for, and handed it over to the nearby Pingvellir national park centre, where we had stopped as well. Remakably, I found my phone intact.

True to form, Duja ignored the big geysers and spotted budding baby geyser.

----


**Day 2**

After collecting my phone from Thingvellir, we started on [Route 1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Route_1_(Iceland)) via Selfoss. 

We saw the two waterfals on our way.

- [Seljalandsfoss](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seljalandsfoss). This is the one where you can walk behind the waterfall. 
- [Skógafoss](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sk%C3%B3gafoss). This is the larger one where you have to climb a lot of steps. 


I introduced Duja to Sigur Ros, which she mockingly started calling Sugar Floss. 


----

**Day 3**

At some point we try, Ruggbraud, bread baked from the very fire of the earth


We relax in hot pots filled with steaming water heated with geothermal hear from the earth.

https://www.tripadvisor.com/Attraction_Review-g189960-d10223970-Reviews-Hoffell_Hot_Tubs-Hofn_East_Region.html

----

**Day 4**


We reach the beach [at this place](https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dyrh%C3%B3laey) It is lovely. We are so happy. 


We walk on a floating ice in a glacial lagoon. 

----

**Day 5**


We venture out in the freezing night to try our luck with the Northern Lights. We spot them and capture it.  

----

**Day 6**


We ate hot dogs and tried Hakarl. Manan bought some pants at the flea market. I helped him negotiate it down by playing the bad cop in the the good cop/bad cop routine. 


---------

Brennevin was quite good. 

We fly from Luton Airpot.  The flight takes ~ 3 hours and cost about £160 return. 



---







