---

layout: post-normal
title: Bullshit Jobs
date:   2018-04-19 09:00:11
tag: 
categories: draft
excerpt: A Call to Arms
permalink: /bullshit
comments: true

---

Basic Question: Why aren’t the people working towards the progress of humanity most well rewarded? Why isn’t wealth, fame and prestige associated with those pursuing science, mathematics, research, teaching and academia?  

> "...people are not equal in raw skill or intelligence or other native capacities; on the contrary, they differ greatly, through no choice of their own, in the various capacities that the market tends to reward. So some people who are perfectly willing, even anxious, to make exactly the choices about work and consumption and savings that other people make end up with fewer resources, and no plausible theory of equality can accept this as fair. This is the defect of the idea fraudulently called ‘equality of opportunity’: fraudulent because in the market economy people do not have equal opportunity who are less able to produce what others want."


----


[Chosing Comfort in 20s led to a life of emptiness and pain](https://nextshark.com/man-reveals-how-choosing-comfort-in-his-20s-led-to-a-life-of-emptiness-and-pain/)

Are you currently siting in a cubicle crunching numbers on an excel sheet for a large multinational corporation, wondering, at the back of your mind,  how you ended up this way? Are you going the drudgery of improving some small code element of some small largely irrelevant feature of a website, not knowing if your life is making any difference to humanity in the long run? Is there a corner of your soul, tugging at your heartstrings asking you to give up everything, and instead pursue music, social activism, or poetry, or writing, or philosophy, or scientific research - your heart’s desire? Maybe you drowned out inner voice with the argument that your current work is necessary to earn the bread. And prestige. And respect. Your friends and family respect you for working for X management consulting firm or Y Silicon Valley company or Z investment bank. What will they think? How will you make them understand that you gave all this up, for listening to something as vague as ‘’voice of inner instincts”, or “pangs of moral conscious”?  No, you can’t just leave this life. You need to sell yourself on weekdays to earn your freedom on weekends, at least for a few years - in order to save enough to be able to afford a house, a marriage, education for your kids and indeed - a good life. This is the way the world works, this is how it is to be. 

But why is the world this way? This is not some natural law, like the laws of gravitation. It is a result of our social arrangements, our culture, and the result of how incentives in our economy are structured.

Economics, and flawed, blind-sighted, auto-pilot based government policy, is the reason most of us are working even longer hours, in even less meaningless jobs, and economic inquality is at its peak. 

There is a deep sense of injustice in that movie celebrities, or star footballers, or savvy politicians, get a major chunk of fame, wealth or power in our society, whereas scientists and researchers, poets, and artists, or development activists - those who do most for the human condition and mankind’s progress, are left to fight for breadcrumbs (or have only intellectual, aesthetic or moral satisfaction to count as reward.) Why is a career in the entertainment industry (that requires little effort and provides little public benefit) so well rewarded,  whereas a lifetime spent publishing papers in academic journals only thrown pennies at?  Why don’t those who contribute most to the progress of humanity, or involve themselves in nobler pursuits and provide long lasting fruits, get the major share of our economic pie?

For not only such a society outrages our moral sense, but it is also highly inefficient. It screws up the whole incentive mechanism, by channeling talents in pursuits which do not further our own interests. Most people flock to what provides them  financial security, or material comfort, or fame and recogition, and if none of the latter are associated with what is of ultimate, long-lasting value to us as a species, then we are inevitably wasting a huge amount of our human resource down the drain.  As someone said, "The best minds of my generation are thinking about how to make people click ads. That Sucks”.


The logic of capitalism is that those who provide what others want are the ones most rewarded. Cristinano Ronaldo earns  £274,000 per week because this is what the rest of the world is willing to pay for his services, whereas a post-doc researcher languishes at say £20,000 a year because no one wants research publications with no immediate foreseeable impact. Millions enjoy a popular movie; few can comprehend, let alone appreciate, philosophy or poetry or fine art. 

Pure capitalism, left to collective whims and fancies, is a recipe for disaster. It doesn’t further our own interests. Someone needs to fund scientific research, someone needs to make sure creative labours like mathematics or art and music and philosophy, and the business world ain’t gonna do it.


> "A farmer ploughing away in his field producing food for the masses is going to spend a lifetime in poverty, while bullshitters are able to charge around twelve thousand pounds to write a two-page report sounding like "How to Improve Engagement Among Key Digital Health Care Stakeholders" for a pharmaceutical client to present during a global strategy meeting. The report wasn’t used in the end because they didn’t manage to get to that agenda point. The economics is defined by demand and supply. Isn’t this a fundamental injustice? The devious working of our economic machine, the artificial creation of demand for skills that lack in supply, the rigging of the game. It is is plain as day to see: unless you are one of the beneficiaries, in which case, like a criminal rationalising his crimes so he could live with himself, you spend a lifetime rationalising the system you benefit from. How can you defend Capitalism?"

-----


> The darkest secret about working for Google is that despite the free meals and the cheerful attitude and the access to fantastic technology you’re still a worker in a capitalistic system. You don’t own the means of production. You aren’t going to have access to the true benefits of your labor; at best you’ll be paid a small fraction of what your labor’s worth. You’re making money faster than people at the bottom end of the working class do, but you’re still one of them. You’ll still lose your health insurance if you leave your job. Your pension will still go away if there’s another financial crisis like the last one. You still pay a significant amount of your income in what economists like to call rents. You’re an at-will employee: Google can fire you at any time, for any reason. If you disagree with this, well, you’ve already agreed to binding arbitration, which is to say, you only have a leg to stand on if the company decides it’s going to let you try and stand on it.
None of this is really a secret. But it’s not often openly discussed. We’d all like to believe that we’re not losers. I mean, we work for Google, right? How can we be losers? 


----


**In Praise Of Startups**

Brings into life the hackers, artists, craftsmen, change-makers in you. Turns people into active citizens and contributors to the community, country and civilisation, instead of passive takers of rigid institutional structures. 
This in turn makes the economy vibrant, dynamic and alive, that is, more responsive to society's needs.  The social collective brain is more active, alive, and conscious about where it is going. The old way of working was “rise up, go to work for someone else (be a slave), get paid, retire and wait to die”. We have shifted from security and slavery to autonomy and risk, from centralised hierarchies to decentralised flat structures, from suits to hoodies, from passive boredom to active engagement.


-----

**Lack Of Intellectual Culture In India**

In India, young intelligent students with lots of potential are channeled into either engineering or medicine. This is a huge waste of talent, talent which, if properly trained, could have contributed to literature, philosophy, arts, music, language and politics. There’s large intellectual vacuum, both in diversity and quality, in public culture.   Instead of public intellectuals that promote critical thinking, we have charlatans trying to sell us snake oil.  Instead of philosophers, we get self-styled godmen.  Instead of writers, we get Chetan Bhagats. 




 

