---

layout: post-normal
title: How Dating Apps Are Grown?
date:   2020-03-11 09:00:11
tag: 
categories: startups
excerpt: 
permalink: /growth
comments: true

---

----
Thanks to Aaron Schildkrout, Andrew Chen, Brett Marin and [Sam Yagan](https://www.forbes.com/sites/alejandrocremades/2019/02/09/this-founder-bounced-back-from-startup-failure-to-leading-a-400m-ipo-that-transformed-online-dating/) for the ideas. 

---



#### Virality

Virality is the kind of growth where instead of the company acquiring or attracting users, existing users pull in other users. For a product to be virual, on avaerage, an individual user is responsbible for bringing in atleast one more user. 

**Scope: Very difficult but possible.**

How? 
- Requires product magic that creates a "buzz"
- Viral loops within the product (user journeys that smoothly incentivizes people to invite others)
- (Don't do this) Spammy tactics like capturing address book.

> The only two dating sites in the world that have attained true virality are Badoo and Tinder. A few others have attained rapid exponential growth through some complex dynamic including a large advertising spend. But in every one of these cases, the result has been a massively degraded experience verging on soft porn, disturbingly spammy tactics, and a userbase with very low lifetime values relative to match.com. 

> With the unicorn exception of Tinder, the only way to attain virality in dating (discovered thus far) is to aggressively (read: deceptively?) capture the user’s email address book and spam the entire list. Basically: block the feeling that the user might find love (or, more to the point: sex) with a tricky address book capture. 

> If your goal is to create a dating site that isn’t solely about finding sex and that has the potential to become a well-respected national or international brand with high subscription revenues, virality has, to-date, been nearly impossible to achieve. I’ve met with two or three dozen people in the last few years thinking about starting dating sites. Of these, maybe 90% have believed in some magic virality system. Of these, none have achieved magic. - [Aaron Schildkrout, founder of How About We](https://andrewchen.co/iacs-howaboutwe-co-founder-how-to-avoid-delusional-thinking-in-start-up-growth-strategy-guest-post/)

----

**City-by-city expansion** 

 
**Scope: Bootstrapping a series of local marketplaces is very hard, and expensive.**

> People are willing to travel to meet each other, but only so much. And there needs to be the right mix of male/female participants (or whatever permutation makes sense).  - [Andrew Chen](http://andrewchen.co/why-investors-dont-fund-dating/)
 
How? To make this work, each city needs to get spun up the same way that on-demand services are spun up.

----

#### Events

**Scope: Unscalable and expensive, unless the experience is magically enough that it can generate word-of-mouth.**

> We often see dating products continually hold a series of unscalable events/parties/etc in a city to get things going. Until there’s word-of-mouth, and enough people to generate a quality experience, the marketplace will suck. 

> I realized the error of my customer acquisition strategy as I awkwardly made my way through a small Meetup I had just pitched. It was 11pm on a Tuesday, I was exhausted and still had real work to do once I got home. Yet there I was, in a shitty bar trying not to skewer anyone with my Sonar sign as I dodged person after person asking me to install THEIR app. Lesson Learned: Events are for research, business development, and hiring; NOT for getting to 10,000,000 downloads. - [Brett Marin of Sonar (ambient social networking app) ](https://medium.com/@brett1211/postmortem-of-a-venture-backed-startup-72c6f8bec7df)

Examples
* Events and parties (Floh)
* Sororities (Tinder) 
* [Reading Groups](https://lbb.in/delhi/tinder-readings-calling-bibliophiles-reading-romps/)
* [Lessons from 130 Dinners, Summits and Salons](http://firstround.com/review/cut-through-the-small-talk-and-connect-lessons-from-130-dinners-summits-and-salons/)



----

#### Ads


**Scope: Works, but becomes less effective at scale, and gets expensive because of competition. Cannot be relied as the primary channel.**

- [Andrew Chen on why paid marketing is tricky to grow, at scale, as the primary channel](https://twitter.com/andrewchen/status/993560378129960960)


> It is the ONLY strategy that has ever worked to build a truly mainstream dating brand over time, with the sole exceptions of OKCupid (whose primary strategy was being free and which took nearly a decade to attain true scale) and possibly Tinder.  

> Very few consumer web companies talk in their very early stages about buying traffic as a core part of their customer acquisition strategy (though this is changing). This relative absence is indicative — more than anything else — of the belief in magic. Advertising is the only reliable, scalable, predictable way of acquiring users for mainstream dating sites.

> For those who do include direct acquisition in their strategy, there is usually a massive underestimation of the amount of work required for hardcore funnel and LTV optimization. Building a truly effective CRM alone is years of work, and this is just one piece of the optimization required to even begin to compete for positive ROIs with the major dating advertisers in the world (match.com , for example, spends hundred(s) of millions of dollars each year on ads; you can be sure their conversion funnel is fairly well-optimized).
So, either the absence of a paid acquisition strategy or the presence of one that underestimates what optimizing a conversion funnel really takes both echo the magical beliefs that pervade most early distribution plans.


**Main Challenge**: Conversion Funnel and LTV Optimization by building an effective CRM. This is harder than it might look, but can be done.

> When slicing a market by behavior, ensure that you don’t confuse buying stage, or purchase intent within the mix. For example, unit economics learnt from the coupé market may provide helpful benchmarks before scaling up to sedans, but the CAC for customers that have configured a car, will probably be much healthier than CAC for customers that have not yet configured a car, as the the former probably has much more purchase intent and is easier to convert.


**Costly**

An ad click if you search for online dating - a CLICK - often costs over $5. Match spends millions of dollars per year with an optimized conversion funel. 

In mobile its tricky, AdMob is terrible with doing performance marketing as effective as other mediums. 

> I would suggest international (depending on your payment providers). Why? Cheaper clicks, easier to get market saturation, less competition. Pay some international student to do translation and pay 'em $50 for the day


> Unless you're in a market where products are as undifferentiated as cigarettes or vodka or laundry detergent, spending a lot on brand advertising is a sign of breakage.

Advice on Ads

* **Geographic Targeting**


> Your goal at the end of the day is geographic targeting (regardless of the country). The more concentrated your efforts the better. If its the US — NYC is good, SF and LA are also good too. 

* **Spend Money In Targeted Bursts Rather Than Spread It Out**

> I would suggest spending money faster. 20k across a few months might mean a few hundred people a day but if you spend it across a few weeks you will have a better initial user base. Depending on your targeting you can loose a lot of users fast. If you have a fast growing database its easier to have a higher "stick" and your conversion to paid (assuming its subscription) will be higher as more communication will be going back and forth. - [Best Way To Spend 20k](https://www.quora.com/User-Acquisition-Lets-say-I-have-20k-for-marketing-What-is-the-best-way-to-spend-it-when-I-launch-a-web-dating-app)

**Use Psychographics To Model Mindsets** 

> “Attitudinal” factors build upon demographics to define more characteristics of what a target market thinks, feels and does. For example, several years ago I was consulting for British supermarket Sainsbury’s, who were at the time battling with (Walmart-owned) Asda for the position of second largest supermarket in the UK, behind Tesco. While the potential market for Sainsbury’s was the ~62 million people that lived in the UK, Sainsbury’s could not afford the media spend to reach everyone.

> Instead Sainsbury’s worked to define a subset “Mindset audience” of approximately 12mm people that they felt “should” be shopping at Sainsbury’s. The mindset audience was constrained to people that agreed with attitudinal values that Sainsbury’s exhibited, such as “I believe it is worth paying extra for organic food” and 10 or so other points that would identify an ideal shopper from among the masses. This psychographic classification was used to focus media spend, which at the time was largely “offline” media, but now could be done much more effectively with digital media thanks to ad platforms.


**Look for signals where customers may be unconsciously identifying and segmenting themselves**

> As a marketer, I love the ability to reach only people that have previously done something that suggests that they might be a potential customer for my product.

> When I led digital for Audi of America at AKQA, we were able to use information collected from data exchanges and DMP’s to understand which type of car a visitor might be interested in BEFORE they even visited any Audi-owned presences at all. So if a person had configured say a BMW M3 on an auto industry site, we could show them an Audi RS5 on a display ad that could follow them around the web, or even their very first arrival to our site.


> For example, we could use this information to send a test message to only new customers that seemed interested in a small Coupé, and not include the larger markets of sedans and SUV’s.

**Give A Missed Calls To Get Something For Free (Sports scores, Celebrity Message etc.) And Build A social graph you can target**

1) Word-of-mouth is powerful, beyond what we had ever anticipated. Two examples:

> Simply as a test we created a Cricket Scores service whereby a user could ZipDial (or dial and hang up, toll-free) to a particular number to get back an instant SMS with the latest cricket score. We did zero marketing other than me posting the ZipDial Cricket number on Facebook a couple times. Within a few months the service completely took off and there were millions of users zipdialing millions of times per day.

> Upon realizing that Cricket had gone viral, we knew we needed to capture this social graph more intelligently. We built ZipDial Friend Referrals to incorporate into our customer campaigns, and it’s been amazing how well it has worked. The user experience starts with an ad in traditional media (e.g. print, TV, point of sale), and after ZipDialing to respond, the user is prompted to refer friends to the brand. In every case, there is a viral increase in reach of between 20-75 percent in responses (and therefore effectively an increase in ROI of 20-75 percent) due to friends inviting friends to participate in the campaign. It still amazes me that even though fewer than 10 percent of our users have smartphones or access to Internet, they are able to create these viral campaigns and build a social graph.


> Willingness to pay among low-income consumers is much stronger than others would give credit. For example, take mobile payments. For users in India earning $100-200 per month, mobile payments is not about splitting a dinner bill with friends. A lady living in a slum or village who can save a $0.50 bus ride and 4 hours between travel and waiting in line to pay an electricity bill would gladly pay at least $0.50 fee for that payment transaction, something we more-connected users in the U.S. would refuse to pay. There is vibrant consumption happening even if it is at lower-value transactions, and there is strong willingness to pay for goods and services of value.

Every touch point they have with a consumer in the “real world” carries a ZipDial number as a call to action. The engagement started by dialing the first ZipDial call to action number activates an application on the platform, and the engagement continues in a flow of activities. Users become ZipDial Followers and get updates and engagement, similar to being a Twitter or Facebook follower.


For example for these customers:

> Gillette starts with print ads, TV ads, or placards of agents giving out sample razors in shopping centers. Users engage with activities like “hear actor Salman Khan’s special message about his new movie” or “pledge to support rededication of the Gateway of India to Indian soldiers” or calling women to ZipDial to answer surveys about whether they prefer a beard or clean-shaven face on their man.

> Greenpeace in their PR or carried by agents who greet citizens on the street. Users ZipDial to pledge support for the various causes they support like “stop deforestation and save tigers,” “stop toxic dumping by corporations,” or “more strict regulations for food safety in India.”


> Disney Channel in all of their programming, including both direct Disney engagement like “vote for your favorite Disney princess” or “spot Mickey and ZipDial as he pops up on the screen” as well as brand solutions for their advertisers like “answer a quiz competition for Horlicks.”

ZipDial followers recruit their friends to engage (as mentioned above regarding friend referrals). In that way, every “real world,” traditional media not only becomes interactive and sticky, but also viral.


Marketers then use ZipDial Analytics for their “real world” campaigns in the same way that they would use Google or Facebook Analytics for online performance and engagement. 

Here are some interesting metrics from these three customers:
Gillette has more than 2.4 million ZipDial users engaged compared to 1.63 million Facebook likes. Users who respond to Gillette ads invite an average of 2.8 friends to join Gillette’s ZipDial Followers, though interestingly, users who were recruited by a friend are even more likely to invite other friends at an average rate of 3.2 friends.

Greenpeace has over 1.4 million ZipDial users compared to 131,000 Facebook likes. Click-through or “dial-through” rates on updates to Greenpeace’s ZipDial Followers are extremely high at 21 percent, which is far above the typical 2-3 percent response rate they get on updates to non-followers. Greenpeace also has a very high rate of viral reach. Users who responded to Greenpeace promotions have recruited an additional 54 percent of users to follow Greenpeace.

Disney, in only their first month of using ZipDial, acquired more ZipDial users than their still only 281,000 Facebook users. Within only that first month, Disney also saw a very high active rate with an average of 8.1 engagements per user.

Not only do these advertisers drive more engagement, but this also directly translates to analytics on performance and ROI of their traditional media spends. ZipDial Analytics allows marketers to slice data across media channels, geography, user profiles, etc.



- [How To Do Facebook Ads Without Breaking The Bank](https://medium.com/hello-meets/how-to-do-your-facebook-ads-right-without-breaking-the-bank-dcf6b022df10)
- [CTR Via Facebook Ads](https://www.quora.com/What-is-the-highest-CTR-that-people-have-gotten-on-a-large-millions-of-impressions-Facebook-ad-campaign)
- [Our First Big Ad Campaign: How we did it?](https://www.appboy.com/blog/our-first-big-ad-campaign-how-we-did-it/)


------


#### Influencers




**Examples**

> Zynga with Friends even teamed up with Lady Gaga to send ten winners who played Gaga's word of the day to one of her shows.

> Skillshare attracted some high profile personas in the tech space like who offer classes via the platform. The biggest boost might come from Fred Wilson who announced today that he will teach [MBA Mondays](http://www.avc.com/a_vc/2011/08/mba-mondays-live-and-skillshare.html) at the Union Square Ventures event space. Those classes will also be streamed live and recorded. The attendee fee will be donated to charity.

> What really helps in the recruitment process is that most masters who have devoted their lives to learning and practicing a difficult skill want to share what they’ve learned with others. For the most part, our instructors have had mentors who helped them along the way, and as a result they’re really excited for an opportunity to do the same for students. Kevin Spacey said he felt like it was his responsibility to “send the elevator down” for the next generation of actors. It sometimes feels like the impulse to teach is an integral part of being a master -- they love seeing the work of the next generation.

> [Words with friend exists because of John Mayer](http://gizmodo.com/5836590/words-with-friends-exists-because-of-john-mayers-twitter-account-rip)

**Just Some Ideas**

* Real Life Geniuses Outside The Limelight: Pritzker Price, Fields Medallists, MacArthur Genius grant winners, Olympics gold medalists, Nobel Prize, Kyoto Prize, International Math Olympiads, Rhodes Scholarships. Give them an incentive like getting to teach classes etc.
* Widely Read Content Creators: Brandon Stanton, John Oliver, Zen Pencils, Brainpickings, XKCD, SMBC,
* Fammous Brand Ambassadors: Wes Anderson, Usain Bolt, Roger Federer, Simone Biles, John Oliver, Terrence Tao, Raghuram Rajan, Natalie Portman, Matt Damon, AR Rahman, Michael Phelps, Stephen Fry, Barack Obama
* Power Users in Existing Platforms: Quora, Twitter, Instagram
* Real Life Social Capital: BNOCs
* Retired Ex-famous folks outside the limelight

**Playbook**

1. Make a list of influencers/bloggers who are most likely going to feature your product with [BuzzSumo](http://buzzsumo.com/) or [Traackr](http://traackr.com/).
2. Engage the influencers/bloggers on social media by RT/favourite/reply to their content. Offer value first (think about the reciprocity principle.
3. Timing and relevancy is everything. If they have written about something that is related to your product or industry, reach out and start the dialogue.
4. Give them exclusive invite or offer to try out your product (e.g. lifetime pro membership, free first year subscription etc).
5. If they like it, ask them to write about it. Make their lives easier by providing 5 to 10 bullet points as to why people use it.
6. Minimize friction further by offering to write the blog post for them.
7. Continue to build the relationship and engagement.
8. Form something like this: [Apple Masters: Early Group of Apple Endorsers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AppleMasters)



**References**

* [Recommended guide](http://traackr.com/influencer-marketing-guide/).
* [Learning Nerd Video Channels](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCShMdwVge5CCoQBkdCko3TQ) 
* [Influencer marketing examples](http://www.referralcandy.com/blog/influencer-marketing-examples/)
* [How Blink uses influencer marketing?](https://chatbotslife.com/how-blink-is-using-influencer-marketing-to-get-thousands-of-users-overnight-7090c303191d)
* [How to take a class from Serena Williams and Usher](https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/27/fashion/how-to-take-a-class-from-serena-williams-and-usher.html?_r=0)
* [1000 Subscribers](https://www.groovehq.com/blog/1000-subscribers)


----

#### PR/Press



**Scope** Can drive visitors but NOT a business-creating source of traffic.

> About 3 months into launching HowAboutWe we had a full-page front-page print article in the New York Times Sunday Styles section. It was literally the best non-TV press we could have gotten. It drove more traffic than we’d ever had by about 10x. It was an awesome achievement at that stage. Four years later, while an article like that would have been great, it would have driven a nearly indiscernible increase in traffic. It would be a cool, small, irrelevant bump. For early stage startups we were probably in the top 2 percentile for press converge. And this was key for branding and so on. But it was categorically NOT a business-creating source of traffic. This is very hard to understand for new entrepreneurs. They imbue press — like most things — with a magical aura of inexplicable growth creating powers.  - [Aaron Schildkrout, founder of How About We](https://andrewchen.co/iacs-howaboutwe-co-founder-how-to-avoid-delusional-thinking-in-start-up-growth-strategy-guest-post/)

How? You probably need someone like Trello's [Stella Farman](https://mixergy.com/free-first-sections-pr-on-a-budget-course/) 

> Well, congratulations on it. I can’t end this without saying thank you to Stella for introducing us. Stella Garber is amazing.

> *Michael*: I had my eye on her for a long time. I had worked with her or I had seen her and talked to her and seen what she had done at a previous company. I knew when I started Trello I had to get her.

> *Andrew*: For PR, you mean, you saw what she did there?

>*Michael*: Yeah. I remember poking at that over the years. There was never like a right position for her. But when it came up... she had a startup at the time that she was working on. So, it took a little bit of convincing. But I’m really excited to be working with her.

> *Andrew*: I’ve always been amazed by the way she promotes the companies she works with. It’s a human touch that also understands my position. I wanted to have you on, but how do I have you on? How do I tell her I’m not sure what to do with this? Well, she totally understood and she said, “Look, here’s the angle that we could take and here’s some research that will help make this into a great interview,” which I now have on my screen here.

> For anyone who hasn’t seen her, her name used to be before she got married Stella Fayman. She did one of the first Mixergy courses where she taught how she gets publicity for the companies she works with. You’ve got to go and watch it. She’s fantastic. If you ever get to go see her at a conference, go see her. 



**Playbook**

**Use Mechanical Turk + Google News API to hack your own PR**

The brilliant people at [Customer Development Labs](http://customerdevlabs.com/) have created a press hack where you can easily get the e-mails of all the journalists who are most likely to cover your startup. See complete guide [here](http://customerdevlabs.com/2013/09/24/google-news-api-mturk-press/).

1. Go to http://press.customerdevlabs.com/
2. Search a term that’s related to your startup category (e.g. SaaS, social media, hologram, kickstarter etc) and download the CSV.
3. Upload the CSV to Mechanical Turk.
4. Give instructions to your workers on how to [find anybody’s e-mail address](https://www.distilled.net/blog/miscellaneous/find-almost-anybodys-email-address/).
5. Build a press kit. Download [my example here](https://www.dropbox.com/s/mk520mxe2wh8pqo/Press%20Kit%20Sample.zip?dl=0).
6. E-mail the reporters individually and pitch your startup. [See sample pitch e-mails here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1MEIzcW5Kzp2VGhpnwakKbgdZMKgNAiAuZjbMGLa-odo/edit?usp=sharing)

[Other PR hacks curated by Giovanni](http://www.producthunt.com/@casinellig/collections/pr-hacks)


**Turn every conversation with the media into a conversation about the vision**

> “What makes a company like Uber get covered is not the fact that it’s a taxi service; it’s the story that Uber is completely changing the transportation industry. If companies like Uber only talked about what they did now, they’d be boring and they’d only get a fraction of the media coverage.”

> When you’re a startup just getting traction, you can’t offer the salary and benefits that a world-class employee would normally get at a large company. You haven’t accomplished a lot that you can talk to the media about. So, what you’re always selling is the sizzle; not the steak. The sizzle is your vision!”

Quarterly Vision Document Emails: Herold advises his clients to send out the vivid vision quarterly to their customers, “90% clients may not care, but even if just a few do, you’ll be able to take your relationship to a whole new level.”

[YC: How to think about PR?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KlekeNwOGHw)

----


#### Partnerhips

**Scope: A Massive Time Waste**

Closing a partnership deal, such as the one between Uber and Spotify, typically requires many phone calls, meetings, referrals, and negotiations, especially if your company is not yet highly successful.  Many early-stage startups lack the contacts, credibility, and resources to strike massive deals with big companies.

> The problem here is distorted ideas about how much traffic other entities can drive. For instance, with HowAboutWe we had the idea that we would feature venues as great date spots and that, in return, they would drive their lists to us. But small venues don’t really have meaningful lists. We didn’t understand this at all — we believed in a magical conception of biz dev. Ultimately we found a biz dev strategy that has worked to a much more significant extent (see [nymag.howaboutwe.com](http://nymag.howaboutwe.com/) for an example of how we worked with much larger traffic sources to drive growth); but it is fairly rare to find such a tactic. Many — if not most — early BizDev ideas are rooted in delusion about the traffic-driving potential of proposed partners.

> In the winter of 2011, we signed a partnership w/ Wired magazine to demonstrate our technology by providing visitors of their Times Square popup store with personalized in-store product recommendations That “small side project” cost us 6 weeks of development and delivered no appreciable benefit other than getting to hang out with the cool people at Wired.
    * Lesson Learned:
    * You do not have 20% time. Identify your top three priorities. Throw away numbers two and three.


> When MTV, Kraft, Digitas, and the like reached out to us we weren’t sure what they wanted. It took us at least 10 meetings to realize that, rather than delivering us millions of their customers on a silver platter, they were keeping tabs on us so that they could get access to OUR audience if we ever took off!
    * Lesson Learned:
    * Be polite, but postpone brand and agency “intros” until you’ve built your own audience. If you build it, they will come (and pay). Corollary: Investors know this. You sound stupid when you talk about your impending “big deal” with “XYZ brand” that’s going to drive massive customer acquisition and revenue.


But can help with exits if you end up needing one.

> Being able to grow as a leader, and handling that at a large scale of personnel and constantly evolving your own job role is vital too. Sam says founders should be spending 5% to 10% of their time out there building relationships and connecting with those who may eventually be acquirers.

* *Defunct or complementary startup*s: infed, Cashew, SkillHippo, Tapchief, Refuga, Be Welcome, The Dating Ring, Ryan Allis, Hive and Connect,  Femsplain one place women have found friends online, using their Facebook group, Slack channel and Twitter to meet.. Femina, The Muse
* *Festivals:  College Festivals (Rendezvous e.g.), LiteratureFestivals (like JLF, South by Southwest): Partner. Entry point: registration, celeb twitters etc. In return: get them speakers from abroad, oxford etc. 
* *Government*
    * Align to the government’s priorities: The products we launched in September are closely aligned to StartUp India, Digital India and Skills India. This helped us have a meaningful conversation with the government officials
    * Make your asks clear and succinct: It is far easier to chart the course of your partnership with the government if you let them know which part you need action on and exactly how they can help. In our case, we wanted all AICTE affiliated colleges and their students to have access to the Placements product. Signing the MoU was the next step!
    * Invest in public policy: You need a person that understands how to work with the government, and aligns with some of the key initiatives you are driving for your company. Investing in a public policy professional helped us get meaningful meetings, which drove tangible results.


Examples

* Spotify created a [partnership](https://www.theverge.com/2011/11/9/2550211/spotify-mog-rdio-facebook-music) with the social networking site by integrating with Facebook’s Open Graph platform.This move to accelerate growth was no accident: Spotify’s founders convinced Sean Parker, one of the founders of Facebook, to become an advisor for Spotify. *S*potify managed to achieve massive expansion by giving its users the ability to share their Spotify using activities (songs listened to, track lists created, etc.) with others across Facebook. Building partnerships and growing on top of other networks is clearly part of Spotify’s marketing strategy.Back in 2014, Spotify inked [a deal](http://www.businessinsider.com/uber-partners-with-spotify-to-personalize-music-in-rides-2014-11) with Uber  to connect the two apps so that Uber riders could listen to custom Spotify playlists whilst riding in Uber vehicles.
*  co-working space WeWork announced it would [team up with Airbnb](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-10-04/airbnb-teams-up-with-wework-to-lure-business-travelers) to offer a co-working and accommodation double service to business travellers. And in Florida, Airbnb has been [collaborating with a developer](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/07/realestate/how-to-host-on-airbnb-legally.html?_r=0) to build an Airbnb-branded apartment complex — one way that the company might get around some of the trickier rules  regarding Airbnb rentals in private buildings, which are [potentially hindering](http://skift.com/2017/04/14/airbnbs-growth-slows-in-markets-where-it-faces-more-regulation/) the company’s growth.
* Roposo has also tied up with Tinder, Wedmegood, and UrbanClap.These brands are reaching out to Roposo users by creating short-form video content that works best for them and the Roposo community.
* Roposo also offers access to stylists and fashion bloggers including Sonam Kapoor’s personal stylist Karuna Laungani and Femina Miss India official stylist Surabhi Sharma. Roposo has also tied up with luxury brands like Michael Kors, Pernia’s Popup Shop, Ritu Kumar, and Masaba Gupta, for selling on its platform.
* A partnership with [someecards](http://dating.someecards.com) - and people asked us to create more fun messaging types.
* Let’s Barter recently organised an event called Book Barter Social in association with [Truly Madly](https://yourstory.com/2015/03/trulymadly-funding/).
* Truecaller had partnered with Airtel in March 2017, to let users on the Airtel network see who’s calling, even when users are offline. Priyam noted that Truecaller is in talks to integrate this offline-caller ID feature on other mobile networks.
* On the OEM side, Truecaller had partnered with Micromax to become the default dialer app for one of Micromax’s handset’s [Yunique 2](https://blog.truecaller.com/2017/07/25/truecaller-becomes-default-dialer-for-micromax-yunique-2/). Truecaller expects to come out of the box on more handsets in the near future. Smartphone with dual SIM slots have long been quite popular in India. Priyam elaborated that Truecaller is working on ways to make it easier for people to manage their dual identities more seamlessly.
* [Popxo](https://yourstory.com/2017/04/popxo-3-1m-idg-kalaari/)
* [Upgrad](http://blog.upgrad.com/launching-upgrad-xchange-where-sharp-minds-meet/#.WHS_n2BFOlJ.facebook)

----

#### Online Content

**Scope: it does not provide a business-supporting customer acquisition channel unless content is your product, but OKCupid did it. wonderful for branding. And if you have a product with high lifetime values, it can easily pay for itself.**


> HowAboutWe has a highly successful blog strategy rooted in [thedatereport.com](http://thedatereport.com/) and [nerve.com](http://nerve.com/). But as a pure traffic-driver into our dating product, it was never, well, magical. Let’s say (none of these are real numbers) 100,000 people visited our articles each day. The conversion to the dating site is basically a glorified advertising system — so let’s say 1% of visitors click-thru. That’s 1,000 visitors. If we get a 20% conversion rates off those visitors, that’s 200 sign ups. If we have a 10% conversion to paid, that’s 20 paid users per day. Let’s say paid users are worth $100 to us. That’s ~$2,000 per day. That’s a bit over half a million bucks per year. Not bad; but it’s not a significant business. Content is cool, but not magic.

> [Founder] credits content marketing in the form of blogging with OKCupid’s big success. As well as allowing Google to scrape content from the site for SEO, while competing sites hid everything behind a membership or paywall.



----

#### Real Community Growth

Examples: Time Banking Communities, Couchsurfing, BeWelcome, HelloMeets, 

----

#### Affiliate Marketing

Examples 

- PlentyofFish
- [Shaadi.com](http://affiliate.shaadi.com/revenue-model)
- [Airbnb's call for affiliate partners](https://affiliate.withairbnb.com/?af=746240), where high-traffic sites with over 1 million visitors can embed Airbnb property listings and make commissions when they are booked.  To give you an idea of what kind of site Airbnb might consider as an affiliate partner, according to a source, Airbnb has discussed an affiliate partnership with Groupon.This would make a lot of sense: Groupon itself has been working on expanding its travel and local experiences business as part of its effort to diversify beyond daily deals from local retailers. Recent moves involve a partnership with Viator (http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20171005005863/en) to boost its inventory of local activities, and acquiring LivingSocial, which had also reoriented itself to focus on that sector after its own daily deals business took a nosedive


----






