---
layout: post-journal
title:  "Artificially Intelligent"
date:   2014-05-11 23:46:11
tag: A Guide to escaping the Intellectual Middle Class
categories: fiction
---

"His test scores are great, but..." 

Ms. Brar pauses, looks down at the finals paper, and looks up again. My parents, on the other side of the table, are still beaming, still over the moon at the numbers they saw on my report card moments ago, still proud of the fact that I've managed to beat the other parents' kids to the finish line this year. I am their product, and have just passed another quality check. Now they can face the Aggarwals next door with a hint of smugness, an air of superiority which they've gotten so used to over the years that they can't imagine life without it. 

"... but there's a problem...". Ms. Brar finishes off, reaching across the table to pass over my English paper.
"For example, just read his essay on *Republic Day*"

*In the life of every nation there are certain days which are considered as red-letter days. The Republic Day celebration held on 26th January every year in our country is one of those days. It is the day when heart of every Indian gets fill with patriotic fervour and enormous love for country. In the year 1950, on 26th January, constitution of India...*

 My parents sofly repeat the words *red-letter day* and *patriotic fervour*. They beam even more, if that were possible.  I guess they feel that such phrases are quite imaginative for an 8 year old. They turn towards me, as I look down. They mistake my guilt for modesty. They beam even harder. They don't get it. 
 
 Of course, I did get it. Deep down, I knew what the problem was. Ms. Brar looks at me too, but I avoid her gaze. 

 "That 1000 word essay is *exactly* what I had dictated to them in a classroom practice assignment. Word-to-word. Not a single sentence is his own"

 But isn't that what it was supposed to be? We had to write the right answers, and the teachers are supposed to teach us what the right answers are. How can she have a problem with her own answer - an answer that she had given away in the class! Surely she didn't expect me to know the meanings of words like *fervour* or *enormous* - if she had she would have asked them in the word-meanings section.


 "Are you suggesting that he cheated? Because we assure you he doesn't. He couldn't". My parents are on the defensive. 

 "I am sure he didn't. But he is supposed to write his own thoughts. Whatever I tell them in class is supposed to be illustrative. Sure, he can borrow a few lines, maybe paraphrase a few more. But he is not supposed to memorize a whole essay by heart. Infact, I am quite surprised he could"

"He has a wonderful memory". Here comes the beaming smile again. My parents totally miss the point. 

 None of the other teachers - neither the Maths one nor the Science one, had any problems with me answering questions this way. Trial and error had taught me that memorizing answers verbatim was the only way to ensure that you didn't lose any marks. Any deviations or lose sentences were invariably penalized. The other kids - the less intelligent ones - are the ones who make up words and end up with shoddy answers and lesser percentages and lower ranks. Ms. Brar didn't know the workings of our education system, whereas I had it all figured out. 

 ***

It wasn't just me. My parents had it all figured out too. Two years later, they decided I needed to switch to an all boys-convent school. Not because it upheld high standards of christian moral values, stricter discipline or better scholastic records - it did none of them, but because all their rich colleagues had their kids enrolled there. That's how the class system works - you invest in forming bonds at the top of the ladder early on, and they pull you up later in life. Education has always been more about extending your network than the pursuit of knowledge.

We weren't rich and couldn't afford donations. So I went through the "meritocratic" route - take an entrance exam, an exam which was to be random, unpredictable and new.

By now my memory had improved, and my methods had evolved. I had figured a rhyming couplet at the start or the end usually sprinkles a touch of originality into an essay. I even came up my own poetry algorithm for generating such a verse. It went like this:

- Think up a word resonating with the theme of the essay
- Make up a sentence ending with it
- Run from A to Z to find a rhyming word
- Make up a second related sentence ending with it
- If the couplet still seems out of sorts: loop

I was asked to write on 'How your family celebrates New Year', and my algorithm yielded:

*When the earth completes one revolution around the Sun,*
*It's New Year's day, and my family has a lot of fun!*

I got in. Maybe they saw an element of non-sequitur humour in it. Maybe they made allowances for the aesthetic judgements of a ten year old. But my algorithm for poetry worked. I would continue to use it later to unleash more terrible poems on unsuspecting friends; meanwhile my parents would gloat around about the budding poet they've been bringing up.

***

In my previous school, rote learning and sycophancy got you to the top of the education ladder. My new school was different. No one really cared. Instead, they cared about silly things like literature, sports, and general knowledge.[^race]

<!--The day wouldn’t be considered complete without a prank on a teacher, or lunchtime brawl, or bunking of a class. St. John’s High was full of life.
I'd bunk classes to read my Hardy Boys and Robin Cooks in the library, participate in badminton tournaments, bicycle races and football practices, and win trophies for my school in city quizzing events. -->

After graduation, I occupied myself with what anyone who has gone through pubescence in an all-boys school would be desperate to occupy himself with. I got a girlfriend. 


She was old school material - bookish, very concerned with academics, all study and no play types. She had topped the Board exams, but the results still had her in tears because she hadn't scored more.[^reevaluation] 

She also happened to be passionate about Maths. And since I happened to be passionate about her, I decided that I'd gain her respect by scoring well in that subject. From then on, Math exams became my medieval duels needed to win over the girl. Problem solving get-togethers and study sessions became our academic dates. 

It didn't work out between us, but it worked out between me and Maths. I ended up in the Maths and Computing program of the elite Indian Institute of Technology Delhi. My romantic misadventures had morphed me into the cream of the nation. 

***

Education in India is the new caste system. Either you've a knack for multiple choice tests and memorizing formulas, or you're a nobody. All my classmates at IITD realised this, which is why most of them had chosen to spend their prime adoloscent years calculating the tension in the ropes of pulleys and the FXZgravitational pulls of distant planets. 

The formula for academic success different. The administration had pinned our intellectual identities to a 10 point scale, which would be calculated by a long drawn out formula over the course of our degree. It was slow, complicated and required continous inputs over a longer period of time. Moreover, the exam questions would often require some independent thinking.  Most of us, products of today's meritocracy, were not used to this. Our talent extended only till using clues from multiple-choice questions to zero-in on one of the four options. We were not into actually producing answers, answers which extended beyond a few words, and certainly not the ones which hadn't been answered for us already in class and subsequently hammered into our brains by repeated readings.  We didn't know how to actually run marathons - we were used to only joining in at the last 100m, and on motorbikes, with our memory as fuel tanks, which, of course, would empty as soon as the race is over. 

 But all was not lost. IITD has a reputation of producing visionaries[^uncle], and without doubt, we were incredibly far-sighted. We could see that the marathon was a mere distraction - the actual race - the one which would get us to the next strata of the class system, was different, and the keywords were PoR,[^por] Resume, Networking, and the like. We figured out early on that the pursuit of knowledge and learning and all that sort of thing were in themselves worthless, what mattered was whether one is *perceived* to be learned and knowledgable. We were not the ones to mistake the territory for the map - the map was everything, the territory was nothing.

 Almost an year into the college, I am warming up on the football grounds for an Inter-hostel match which is to start in a few mins. I expect to play left-back. I have been deployed at that position in the past, but I'm hoping I'd be promoted further up the wings this time. It's highly unlikely though - first and final yearites usually take up the defensive duties. Not that they relish it. To be honest, no one likes to be at the back. But freshers, too eager to please, can't really complain, and the final yearites, always wearing a 'been there-done that' kind of look, don't really care.[^final]

 I wonder if there are any freshers in the opposite team. Their goalkeeper had belonged to my batch,  but I'm told he's been absent ever since he got drafted into the college team. Afterall, what's the point of playing ball if you've made it to the next level and hence acquired the license to sell it in your interviews? Like most of us enlightened ones, he'd figured out the meaning of life: That life is a pursuit of making a good CV. I hear he's now moved on to helping Burmese refugees to have his essay to the Harvard Business School stand out.

I don't get to play further up in the wings in that match, and I never make it to the college team. Like my batchmate, I bail out as well. Until much later, when I do rediscover my love for football. Until my final year, when I start not-caring.[^resume]

***



Three years later I am in the examination hall, at the other end of a question which goes like "The director of India's National Knowledge Commission is to draft the government's policy on Innovation, and has sought your expertise. What would you advice, and why?" 

Of course, I hadn't got a clue. It was just the kind of question we used to fear - open ended and requiring original thought. We had spent four years navigating our way through the maze of courses - optimizing for grades, minimizing for contact hours and inputs needed, selecting for lenient professors, and ensuring that there's a mix of sincere classmates whose assignment we'd copy, regular attendess who'd give us attendance by proxy, and a minimum quota of laid-back folks who'd in general lighten up the class. We had certainly become adept at avoiding courses which threw such questions at us.


 I try remembering how I had ended up in this course in the first place.  It wasn't for grades - this one had a bad reputation in that regard. What was it, then? Slowly, it all came back to me. Someone, I think it was Ketan, had mentioned that the professor was known to treat his students to drinks every now and then. That had put it in my radar. And then this charming girl, a friend of a friend, had told me she was going to take it next semester. Where is she now? I havn't really seen her at all in class. Bloody evolutionary instincts.

 But I am not the one to give up. I make up sentences interspersed with phrases like "investing in human resource", "lessons from the Asian tigers", "technology transfer" and "leapfrogging", cite examples of Green and White revolutions, and get the heck out of there. Before darting off, I manage to throw in a graph correlating the number of PhD graduates vs a country's GDP. I think Ketan had mentioned that this professor has a weakness for graphs.

 
 Not all my friends are writing the exams. Most of them are nearing their graduation, and hence preparing for job interviews in small study groups, each consisting of four to five people. In reality, these groups were more like therapy groups where everyone would sit in a circle and bite their nails and collectively fret over their future.

 I was to graduate an year later, so I get an outside view of how everyone arrives at their dream future. My high school friend, a JEE[^JEE] topper who spent the better part of his undergrad years professing his love for Maths, and who had represented India at the International Mathematics Olympiad and spent every summer doing number-theoretic research, first develops an obsession for finance. In the following months, he would accept a job offer from an investment bank, have an epiphany that what he *really* wants is a Masters in Business Administration, and fly off to Bangalore to interview with a B-School. Having an MBA offer in the bag, he'd lose interest in that too, dabble with the prospect of joining the civil services, and eventually join Google. In him, Groucho Marx would have found a kindred spirit.[^marx] 

Some of my other friends are less confused. Shuchi loves literature and want to be a writer someday. Her boyfriend, Nakul, is passionate about machine learning. He has a concrete plan for himself too - after graduation, he'd do research in Network Science with a professor in Santa Barbara. Ketan, on the other hand, is into energy policy, and has spent an entire year assessing the cost effectiveness of solar energy in India. Sachit, a director in the Entrepreneurship Development Cell, can't wait to test his own start-up ideas out in the market. And Spoorti, the most unorthodox of them all, has found her calling in neuroscience. She's written fan mails to VS Ramachandran and Oliver Sacks, attended conferences on autism, and wants to research neurological disorders in San Diego.

So obviously, all of them join big-ticket consulting firms to fullfil their dreams. 

***

An year later, I found myself asking the same question: What next? 

I was barely above average, but I possessed a sociological imagination and understood how our class system works. There are regular trains which take you from one strata of society to the next, and one has to merely ensure that he has the right strategy and sufficient luck to bag a ticket. I had boarded similar trains throughout my life -  from my local primary school to the most prestigious school in the city, and another one from that school to the most prestigious college in the country. I just had to find my next train.

My friends had found already their train. The big-ticket consulting firms did, in fact, give you a *ticket*. They would take you to the next station, where there would be other trains waiting for you - the Harvards and the Whartons and the like.


Tonight,  I'm staring down the application for the prestigious Rhodes Scholarship to Oxford. I've found out that one could use the colonial wealth  amassed by exploiting black slaves in the diamond mines of Africa to buy their ticket to the upper class, and I want in.

"How do you aspire to change your contry's future?", the application asks, and I'm struggling for words. Clueless, I redirect the question to my roommate from first year - a Programming Whiz who's self-admitted biggest ambition in life was to 'raise a family.'  He gives it a long thought. And then responds, "I don't aspire".

Atleast he is honest. I reinterpret the question as "Weave a story out of your life which would maximize the likelihood of you getting this scholarship, with the likelihood function depending on how the story reflects moral fibre, leadership potential, and intellectual vitality", and write about how I wanted to 'leverage the power of data-driven algorithmic techniques to inform India's economic policy.' 

Of course, just like the Republic Day essay I'd written when I was 8, I wasn't really sure what that meant.

***

My moment of realisation
Changing a tyre. Cutting a wood. Plumber. Scoffed


FDI in retail

If there's any emotion which rules over our meritocracy, it's anxiety. All of us are so used to running throughout our life, but after graduation, we are without a race. Everyone is lost. It is no wonder that so many of the students get into preparing for the Common Admission Test[^CAT], or the Civil Services exam. If there were any other highly selective, hyper-competitive standardised examination around, I can wager that somewhere, in some corner, there'd be an IITD grad preparing for it.




***

*This story is fictional, and any resemblence, to any person, living or dead, or any institutions, still functioning or collapsed, is just incidental.*



[^race]: Students from my old school eventually topped the year-end standardised exams, an honour which all the other schools craved for. My new school saw the world differently. It had lost the superficial race which these other schools had framed and constructed, its students were already ahead in the real, long journey of learning and knowledge.

[^reevaluation]: She later got her answer sheets revaluated, and her marks were increased.


[^uncle]: As one of my uncles once addressed me

[^por]: Positions of Responsibility 

[^final]: about anything.

[^resume]: and solemnly resume my defensive duties. Read: Dr. Strangelove: How I learnt to stop caring and love the defensive duties.

[^marx]: "Please resign me as a member. I don't want to belong to any club that will accept people like me as a member"

[^JEE]: Joint Entrance Examination

[^mama]: Maternal uncle

[^CAT]: An entrance test to get into IIMs: premier BSchools of India.
