---
layout: post-journal
title: Roots
date:   2015-06-29 09:00:11
tag: 
categories: draft
excerpt: 
permalink: /roots


---

I was born in Chandigarh, a city about 250 km north of Delhi, lying on the foothills of the outer Himalayas. It was India's first planned city post-independence, and is renowned for its architecture and urban design.  The city was commissioned by Nehru to represent the newly independent nation's modern, progressive outlook. It is also called, quite aptly I think, ‘The City Beautiful’. Although I reside in Panchkula, a satellite town to Chandigarh, it is Chandigarh, where my parents once used to live, where I was born and where I had my schooling, that I most identify with. 

Both my parents were born in the Indian province of Punjab. They both belonged to refugee families, that is, their parents (my grandparents) were dispossessed of their land and and had to move after the partition of India in 1947.  Before the partition, my dad's family lived in a district called Dera Ghazi Khan in the former province of British Punjab.[^partition] My maternal grandparents were married off in their early teenage; this was common practice, I was told, to protect the women of the village from maurauding Muslim raiders. I was never close to any of my grandparents, and most of what I know comes from whatmy father told me of their stories, stories of narrowly escaping death,  of trains full of corpses, of wailing families, of pain, separation and longing.

The partition left the Indian state of Punjab capital-less (Lahore went to Pakistan), and that kick-started the creation of Chandigarh. Chandigarh was designed by the French architect and urban planner Le Corbusier in the 1950s. It eventually became a union territory, and a joint capital of Punjab and Haryana, a state carved out of the eastern portion of Punjab in 1966.

My parents moved to Chandigarh immediately after their marriage  (my dad was offered a job as a landscape architect in a semi-government organisation in Haryana) . He worked in the same role ever since, for 28 years,  though he was been promoted to a very senior position and changed offices multiple times.

He's supposed to retire this year. My mom took up a teaching position in a government school around the same time, and has since then risen through the ranks to take up a prominent position in Punjab's education department.

rural areas, working parents, India's liberalisation, Khalistan militancy, grandparents being married off earlier etc.


---


A few years ago I was reading Taleb's *Black Swan*, and in one of the earlier sections he describes his childhood growing up in conflict-ridden Lebanon. What I really liked about the narrative was that he doesn't just describe that particular period as a snapshot of time, but instead situates it in the context of Lebanon's rich history.  It was clear that his sense-of-self was heavily influenced by the history of his own people. I was fascinated; it provoked me to dig in and do some research on my own ancestral beginnings.

---

 [^partition]: The 1947 partition saw the Muslim dominated western part of Punjab go to Pakistan, and the Hindu Sikh dominated eastern part go to India. Many Hindu and Sikhs lived in the western parts (including my grandparents), and similarly Muslims in the east, and the partition resulted in  displacement of millions and much inter communal violence.)
