---
layout: post-journal
title: The Unix Philosophy and Map Reduce
date:   2019-03-11 09:00:11
tag: 
categories: ideas
excerpt: 
permalink: /unix
comments: false

---


-----


- Any program's output should be able to act as input to another program, so programs can be composed together. 
- The uniform interface in Unix is a "file": an ordered sequence of bytes. Many unix programs by convention treat ths sequence of bytes as ASCII text.
    + Files in a filesytem
    + Communication channels ()
- URLs and HTTP are also unform interface. A URL iidentifies a resource on a website, and iit can be linked to from other website. A user can thus jump seamlessly netween website, owned by different organizations through these links.
    + These was a key inisght. Before the world wide web, there were bulleting board systems, each had its own phone number and baud rate config. A reference from one BBS to another was not a "link that identifies a resource", but in the form of a phone number and modem settings: the user would have to hang up, dial the other BBS, and then manually find the information they were looking for 

------
**What is Map Reduce?**

Within a computer program, it is a design pattern for implementing functions that operate on sequences of elements, which uses the powerful idea of treating functions as first-class values that we can pass around and manipulate in our programs.

In a distributed system context, it is a programming model for executing batch jobs with parallel, distributed, algorithm on a cluster (e.g. processing and generating big data sets)

As an open source implementation (e.g. Hadoop), it is a system that orchestrates the processing of data by marshalling the distributed servers, running the various tasks in parallel, managing all communications and data transfers between the various parts of the system, and providing for redundancy and fault tolerance.

The use of this model is beneficial only when the optimized distributed shuffle operation (which reduces network communication cost) and fault tolerance features of the MapReduce framework come into play. Optimizing the communication cost is essential to a good MapReduce algorithm. The scalability and fault-tolerance achieved for a variety of applications by optimizing the execution engine.

-----


References: 

* Designing Data Intensive Applications
* [Map, Filter Reduce MIT Lecture](http://web.mit.edu/6.031/www/fa18/classes/25-map-filter-reduce/)
* [MapReduce on Wikipidia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MapReduce)

------

