---
layout: post-journal
title: Life Under Meritocratic Capitalism
date:   2020-09-26 09:00:11
tag: 
categories: drafts
excerpt: 
permalink: /merit

---

A Life

The first six years are a blurry mess. 

And then you enter Grade 1. That is big. 

As your teenage years end and you finish schooling, you enter university. This is a pivotal moment of your life: you're an adult now. For the first time you'd be venturing into the wider world, separated from your family. Importantly, you'd be with a big cohort of people the same age as you. 

The next six years would be spent studying, making friends, chasing romance, playing a sport or following a hobby etc.

After graduating, you'd chose a career and be on the first step of a career ladder. You'd exchange about 10 hours a day in exchange for an income. A company is a different institution than university, and your professional relationships would be different from the friendships you formed in college.


Your lifestyle would depend on your income, but on average, about 25% of it will go to tax, 5% to pension, 25% for accomodation, 10% on food, 10% on commute, 15% on luxury and 10% savings. 

You have about 4-10 years to live this life, before you reach your next milestone: marry and settle. In these years, for most people, the demands of the job and finding and building a relationship with a partner are the priorities. 

With your partner, you would want to buy a house. By this time at 10$ annual savings you should have enough saved for a deposit, and you and your partner's salary would allow you to take a healthy mortgage, to buy a 2 Bedroom Apartment or house.

Next you have children. With children come new things to learn: childcare, saving for their education, finding good schools.

As the child grows up, you might want another one. And you might also want to move to a bigger house. 

Congratulations, you're almost 40.




----



Consider the careers chosen by most graduates of an elite education: law, medicine, consulting, academia, finance, and engineering. Climbing the meritocratic ladder in these fields requires incredible smarts, work-ethic and competitiveness. They demand complete and utmost devotion in most of your 20s and early 30s.   The rewards are a comfortable income, intelligent coworkers, and prestigious careers in institutions that take care of life's basic needs.  An honorable existence in the upper echelons of the middle class.


**The 10 Year Ladder**

Year | Law[^Law]       | Medicine[^Medicine]    | Academia  | Consulting | 
---| ----------- | ---------------------  | --------- | ---------   |
1 | LPC/ BPTC  |   Foundation doctor | JRF/Post Doc | Analyst |    
2 | Trainee/Pupil  |   Foundation doctor |JRF/Post Doc | Analyst |  
3 | Trainee/Barrister  | Junior Fellow   | JRF/Post Doc | Jr. Associate |    
4 | Associate |  GP Specialty registrar | Lecturer (Assis. Prof) | Associate | 
5 | Associate  |   GP Specialty registrar | Lecturer (Assis. Prof) |  EM | 
6 | Sr. Assoc  |   GP  | Senior Lecturer | EM | 
7 | Sr. Assoc.  |   GP  | Senior Lecturer (Assoc. Prof) |  Principal | 
8 | Sr. Assoc.   |   GP  | Reader (Assoc. Prof) |  Principal |   
9 | Partner  |   GP | Reader (Assoc. Prof) | Assoc. Partner |
10 | Senior partner |   GP | Professor | Partner |


Year | Engineering       | Finance    | Government  |  | 
---| ----------- | ---------------------  | --------- | ---------   |
1 | Jr. Dev  |   Analyst | Training |  |    
2 | Jr. Dev   |   Analyst |Training |  |  
3 | Sr. Dev  |     Sr. Analyst | - |    
4 | Sr. Dev  |   Sr. Analyst | - | 
5 | Staff Eng.  |   Senior Assoc | - |   | 
6 | Staff Eng.  |   Senior Assoc  | -  |  | 
7 | Sys Architect  |   VP  | -  |  | 
8 | Sys Architect  |   VP   | - |   |   
9 | Sys Architect  |   Principal | -  |  |
10 | CTO |  Managing Director | -  |  |


---



[^Medicine]: Newly qualified doctors enter a two-year Foundation Programme, where they undertake terms in a variety of different specialities. These must include training in General Medicine and General Surgery but can also include other fields such as Paediatrics, Anaesthetics or General Practice. Following completion of the Foundation Programme a doctor can choose to specialise in one field. All routes involve further assessment and examinations. To train as a general practitioner (GP), after completing the Foundation Programme, a doctor must complete eighteen months of posts in a variety of hospital specialities - often including paediatrics, psychiatry, geriatrics and obstetrics & gynaecology. The trainee also has to spend eighteen months as a General Practice Speciality Registrar - a trainee based in a GP practice. After completing this training and the relevant exams, the doctor can become a GP and can practise independently.

[^Law]: Generally, it will take eight or more years to make partner at a large commercial firm. the senior partner is elected by the firm’s partners to serve a three-year term and is typically re-elected until they step down from the role or someone else voices an interest in the position. the Magic Circle - comprised of London's five most prestigious law firms - currently offer first year trainees salaries in the region of £45,000 to £48,000. Once trainees reach their second year salaries rise to between £51,000 and £54,000.

------


Where does the income of an average worker in UK go?


Here's a breakdown.

Expense   | Average |  Me  |
----------| -----------| ----------|
Taxes   | 25%        | 23.2% |
Pension  |  5%   | 5% |
Acco & Utils.   | 25% | 23.2%
Food  | 10%  | 18% |
Commute  | 5% | 0 |
Lifestyle[^luxury]  | 20% | 10% |
Savings | 10% | 20% |

[^luxury]: Combining stuff like clothes, haircare, furniture, gym, health, entertainment, gadgets, travel and gifts under one category.







-----
