---
layout: post-normal
title:  "Artificially Intelligent"
date:   2014-05-11 23:46:11
tag: A Beginner's Guide to escaping the Intellectual Middle Class
categories: essays
excerpt: A Beginner's Guide to escaping the Intellectual Middle Class

---
    
"His test scores are great, but..." 

Ms. Brar pauses, looks down at the finals paper, and looks up again. My parents, on the other side of the table, are still beaming, still over the moon at the numbers they saw on my report card moments ago, still proud of the fact that I've managed to beat the other parents' kids to the finish line this year. I am their product, and have just passed another quality check. Now they can face the Aggarwals next door with a hint of smugness, an air of superiority which they've gotten so used to over the years that they can't imagine life without it. 

"... but there's a problem...". Ms. Brar finishes off, reaching across the table to pass over my English paper.
"For example, just read his essay on *Republic Day*"

*In the life of every nation there are certain days which are considered as red-letter days. The Republic Day celebration held on 26th January every year in our country is one of those days. It is the day when heart of every Indian gets fill with patriotic fervour and enormous love for country. In the year 1950, on 26th January, constitution of India...*

My parents sofly repeat the words *red-letter day* and *patriotic fervour*. They beam even more, if that were possible.  I guess they feel that such phrases are quite imaginative for an 8 year old. They turn towards me, as I look down. They mistake my guilt for modesty. They beam even harder. They don't get it. 
 
Of course, I did get it. Deep down, I knew what the problem was. Ms. Brar looks at me too, but I avoid her gaze. 

"That 1000 word essay is *exactly* what I had dictated to them in a classroom practice assignment. Word-to-word. Not a single sentence is his own"

But isn't that what it was supposed to be? We had to write the right answers, and the teachers are supposed to teach us what the right answers are. How can she have a problem with her own answer - an answer that she had given away in the class! Surely she didn't expect me to know the meanings of words like *fervour* or *enormous* - if she had she would have asked them in the word-meanings section.


"Are you suggesting that he cheated? Because we assure you he doesn't. He couldn't". My parents are on the defensive. 

"I am sure he didn't. But he is supposed to write his own thoughts. Whatever I tell them in class is supposed to be illustrative. Sure, he can borrow a few lines, maybe paraphrase a few more. But he is not supposed to memorize a whole essay by heart. In fact, I am quite surprised he could"

"He has a wonderful memory". Here comes the beaming smile again. My parents totally miss the point. 

None of the other teachers - neither the Maths one nor the Science one, had any problems with me answering questions this way. Trial and error had taught me that memorizing answers verbatim was the only way to ensure that you didn't lose any marks. Any deviations or lose sentences were invariably penalized. The other kids - the less intelligent ones - are the ones who make up words and end up with shoddy answers and lesser percentages and lower ranks. Ms. Brar didn't know the workings of our education system, whereas I had it all figured out. 

***

It wasn't just me. My parents had it all figured out too. Two years later, they decided I needed to switch to an all boys-convent school. Not because it upheld high standards of christian moral values, or stricter discipline, or better scholastic records - it did none of them, but because all their rich colleagues had their kids enrolled there. That's how the class system works - you invest in forming bonds at the top of the ladder early on, and they pull you up later in life. Education has always been more about extending your network than the pursuit of knowledge.

We weren't rich and couldn't afford donations. So I had to go through the "meritocratic" route, i.e., take an entrance exam, an exam which was to be random, unpredictable and new.

By now my memory had improved, and my methods had evolved. I had figured a rhyming couplet at the start or the end usually sprinkles a touch of originality into an essay. I even came up my own poetry algorithm for generating such a verse. It went like this:

>   - Think up a word resonating with the theme of the essay
>   - Make up a sentence ending with it
>   - Run from A to Z to find a rhyming word
>   - Make up a second related sentence ending with it
>   - If the couplet still seems out of sorts: loop

I was asked to write on 'How your family celebrates New Year', and my algorithm yielded:

>   *When the earth completes one revolution around the Sun,*  
>   *It's New Year's day, and my family has a lot of fun!*

I got in. Maybe they saw an element of non-sequitur humour in it. Maybe they made allowances for the aesthetic judgements of a ten year old. But my algorithm for poetry worked. I would continue to use it later to unleash more terrible poems on unsuspecting friends; meanwhile my parents would gloat around about the budding poet they've been bringing up.

***

In my previous school, rote learning and sycophancy got you to the top of the education ladder. My new school was different. No one really cared. Instead, they cared about silly things like literature, sports, music and general knowledge.[^race]

I wanted to gel instraightaway, to mix in, to look and feel like I belonged. I had my breadth -  I was the best wickerkeeper-batsman in my neighbourhood, was well versed with countless mythological tales from my grandpa's storytellings, and I read my newspaper. I could even recite a few dohas by Kabir and a poem of Tagore or two.

But literature, sports and music for the convent educated was something else: it was Shelley and Wordsworth, EPL and WWE, Guitar, not Sitar.  The gentry weren't interested in Krishna and Mahabharat - they were interested in Gandalf and The Battle of Minas Tirith. The general knowledge I possessed wasn't general - the real general knowledge, the authentic kind, was something else, hidden in some distant land, far removed from the hoi polloi, accessible only to the hoi oligoi. 

And so I drank in the anglocentric ethos of my convent school, and propelled myself above the bollywood-obsessed, cricket crazy, Hindi-speaking average Indian peasantry.

<!-- One of the things I learnt in my new school environment was that there’s a strict social hierarchy even in matters such as personal aesthetic taste. Having or showing certain kinds of knowledge is preferable to others. For example, if you know Shelley or Wordsworth you’re cool; if you know Tagore or Ramdhari Singh Dinkar you’re weird. Strumming a guitar is cool, strumming a sitar is not cool.2 You can be gung-ho in supporting EPL clubs or WWE wrestlers, but be laughed at for liking Hockey or Kabbadi. If someone discusses Gandalf and the Battle of Minas Tirith, you should join in, but if its Krishna and Mahabharata, you are to raise your eyebrows and scoff. The general knowledge one is supposed to display as a member of an elite convent school isn’t very general. -->

<!-- One of the laws of Indo-social darwinism I subsequently learnt in my convent school environment was that having radically westernish tastes can suddenly propel you above the general bollywood-obsessed, cricket crazy, hindi-speaking Indian peasantry.  So if you're into Shelley or Wordsworth you're cool; if you're into Nirala or Dinkar you're weird. Strumming a guitar - cool, strumming a sitar - not so cool.[^Bengali] EPL clubs and WWE wresling - Cool, Hockey and Kabbadi - Seriously? Gandalf and the Battle of Minas Tirith - exchange obscure Middle Earth trivia;  Krishna and Mahabharata - raise your eyebrows, contrort your face, and scoff. The general knowledge I was supposed to be display as a member of a elite convent school in a postcolonial world isn't very general. -->


After matriculation,[^matriculation] I occupied myself with what anyone who has gone through pubescence in an all-boys school would be desperate to occupy himself with. I got a girlfriend. 

She was old school material - bookish, very concerned with academics, all study and no play types. She had topped the Board exams, but the results still had her in tears because she hadn't scored more.[^reevaluation] 

She also happened to be passionate about Maths. And since I happened to be passionate about her, I decided that I'd gain her respect by scoring well in that subject. From then on, Math exams became my medieval duels needed to win over the girl. Problem solving get-togethers and study sessions became our academic dates. 

It didn't work out between us, but it worked out between me and Maths. I ended up in the Maths and Computing program of the elite Indian Institute of Technology Delhi. My romantic misadventures had morphed me into the cream of the nation. 

***

Education in India is the new caste system. Either you've a knack for multiple choice tests and memorizing formulas, or you're a nobody. All my classmates at IITD realised this, which is why most of them had chosen to spend their prime adoloscent years calculating the tension in the ropes of pulleys and the gravitational pulls of distant planets. 

However, at IITD the formula for academic success was different. The administration had pinned our intellectual identities to a 10 point scale, which would be calculated by a long drawn out formula over the course of our degree. It was slow, complicated and required continous inputs over a longer period of time. Moreover, the exam questions would often require some independent thinking.  Most of us, products of today's meritocracy, were not used to this. Our talent extended only till using clues from multiple-choice questions to zero-in on one of the four options. We were not into actually producing answers, answers which extended beyond a few words, and certainly not the ones which hadn't been answered for us already in class and subsequently hammered into our brains by repeated readings.  We didn't know how to actually run marathons - we were used to only joining in at the last 100m, and on motorbikes, with our memory as fuel tanks, which, of course, would empty as soon as the race is over. 

 But all was not lost. IITD has a reputation of producing visionaries,[^uncle] and without doubt, we were incredibly far-sighted. We could see that the marathon was a mere distraction - the actual race - the one which would get us to the next strata of the class system, was different, and the keywords were POR,[^por] Resume, Networking, and the like. We figured out early on that the pursuit of knowledge and learning and all that sort of thing were in themselves worthless, what mattered was whether one is *perceived* to be learned and knowledgable. We were not the ones to mistake the territory for the map - the map was everything, the territory was nothing.

***

 Almost an year into the college, I am warming up on the football grounds for an Inter-hostel match which is to start in a few mins. I expect to play left-back. I have been deployed at that position in the past, but I'm hoping I'd be promoted further up the wings this time.

 It's highly unlikely though - first and final yearites usually take up the defensive duties. Not that they relish it. To be honest, no one likes to be at the back. But freshers, too eager to please, can't really complain, and the final yearites, always wearing a 'been there-done that' kind of look, don't really care.[^final]


 I wonder if there are any freshers in the opposite team. Their goalkeeper had belonged to my batch,  but I've been told he's been absent ever since he got drafted into the college team. Afterall, what's the point of playing ball if you've made it to the next level and hence acquired the license to sell it in your interviews? Like most of us enlightened ones, he'd figured out the meaning of life: That life is a pursuit of making a good CV. I hear he's now moved on to helping Burmese refugees to have his essay to the Harvard Business School stand out.

 An hour later, it's about halfway through the match. Goalless.  I have been sauntering leisurely up and down, keeping to a narrow lane just by the sidelines, closest to the linesman, and basking in the light relief that in this match, in this role, I didn't have to shoulder the responsibility of marking anyone. I could finally express myself. 

 Wingers can play badly and get away with it. Their defensive role is limited to being backups. And in counter-attacks they get to steal all the limelight. Midfielders, on the other hand, have to shoulder many ugly responsibilities. And Forwards? Well, forwards are too mainstream. 

I receive a high ball from the other end of the pitch, trap it on my chest, bring it down. A goon from the opposition has followed the ball into my path, my beloved narrow lane. He hovers around me like an annoying fly, but I dribble the ball though his legs, cut inside, and deliver a cross to the far post with the outside of my right foot, the cross just missing the overreaching head of the striker, straight into the arms of the new goalie. 

The striker yells back at me, but I ignore him. I'm lost in my own thoughts, imagining swarms of spectators cheering me on, and hypothetical commentators,  complemented by slow-motion replays, explaining the nuance of the nutmeg, the deceptive change of speed, the inside cut and the clever cross, lauding the finesse, the subtlety I'd brought to the fine art of wing play.

A referee's whistle snaps me back into reality. The scoreboard reads 1-0, and the opposition is huddled together, celebrating.

Inexplicably, I don't get to play up in the wings again after that match, and I never make it to the college team. So, just like my batchmate, I bail out as well. That is, until much later, when I would come to rediscover my love for football. Until my final year, when I would start not-caring.[^resume]

***

In a college where the most popular student T-shirt declares *"I am what you dream to be"*, it is important to learn to set yourself apart. Depending on the strategy you adopt, you can transform and differentiate yourself into a first class aesthete of any variety.

The campus itself was coloured with all kinds. You could run into movie connoiseurs parading IMDb checklists. Lit afficianados who would read only Wikipedia plots. Music fanatics who'd swing their heads back-and-forth like frenzied baboons possessed by demons. And so forth.

But if you are not bestowed with an authentic appreciation for the arts, extravagant displays of gung-ho aestheticism being not your thing, then you may turn to other methods. The general themes to follow - contrarianism, cynicism, skepticism - are simple enough and widely recognized amongst the intelligentsia, like a mutual telepathic agreement. The more specific rules, though, remain well guarded within select inner circles.

For example, just a few know that a true intellectual never laughs, only smiles.[^chesterfield] The rare smile too is to be reserved for situations of irony. Sarcasm, which at times threatens to become more and more mainstream, is to be countered by meta-sarcasm.

I invented a few devices of my own, chief among them being a linguistic maneuvre I liked to call a philosophical whirpool. It involved diverting any discussion, especially one which lent itself to a modicum of subjectiveness, and in which you don't have an ioto of clue what is being talked about, to larger discussions of definitions, truth, morality and relativism. This would in most circumstances send the conversation spiralling down a vortex of irresolvable complexity, if required funneled even deeper by vague references to Heidegger and Wittgenstein, maybe Nietzsche too, and eventually, the original context would not only be thrown away into the abyss with devastating effect, but the whole thing would also leave an impression of some deep enlightened wisdom being buried underneath your surficial persona.

"Do you think the natural gas prices should be increased?"

"Well. It depends."

"Depends on ... what?"

"On the context. This is highly contexual. We must take it on a case-to-case basis."

"You mean you don't know the Indian context? Increasing the prices would make the exploration of oil and natural gas more economically viable. And the increase in price would only feed into the coffers of ONGC and Oil India, which are otherwise running huge lossess. And also private oligarchs like Reliance. On the other hand, since natural gas feeds into the power and fertilizer industry, it would lead to higher electricity and food prices and eventually higher inflation, which would hurt the common man. "

"Of course I know all that. But you need to probe deeper. Ultimately, this is a question of what kind of society we want for ourselves, for our future generations."

"Oh...Ehm...Really? How?"

"Well. Increasing the gas prices would make the economy more efficient, but as you seem to be aware of, it would also hurt the common man because of inflation. What I want you to see is that this would increase the wealth divide. More inequality. This is equality vs efficiency. It's a tradeoff which our society needs to make"

"But how does price setting depends on this? I thought pricing depends on economic models of supply and demand?"

"It would seem to. But then, how do you define "supply"?

"The amount of oil supplied"

"But the supply here depends on the price itself"

<*long thoughtful pause*>

"I think there's an agreed on definition in the contracts signed before exploration. The firms agree to supply a fixed amount in the contract. That would be the definition".

"But then are you implying that the definition depends on the definers, not the defined."

<*even longer, even more thoughtful pause*>

"Interesting. I don't know. That's what economic laws seem to be like. Not rooted in an objective transcendent reality, but in self made-up definitions!"

"Yes. And as Wittgenstein had said, "What should we gain by a definition, as it can only lead us to other undefined terms?"

"Sigh. Such is the nature of language..."

"C'est Le Vie..."


***

<!-- not statistically easy, a struggle, had no point because we trained ourself for someother purpose because of nature
I also put on a veneer of intellectual breadth, wrapped in a garb of highbrow sensibility, and surrounded with a cleverly crafted aura of creative temperament, and went on to  -->

It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession of good grades, must be in want of a life. The dictum applied as much to the rat-race of frenetic credentialism as it did to participants of the academic marathon. 

But for the nation's finest, finding meaning in other pursuits often turned out to be like what flight from prison might have been for Icarus - a bit of a struggle, and not a very pleasant experience altogether . The pursuit of the fairer sex, for example, would in most cases lead to a statistically dead end.[^gender] It was a sad truth that the true nature of our culture's patriarchy dawned on most of us only when our college fantasies weren't fulfilled.

So we found meaning in drugs and hallucinogens. My wingmates, inveterate nocturnal beasts, would endure most nights with the help of role-playing games, all the while hopelessly doped, hollow-cheeked, gaunt, with unblinking, bloodshot eyes, bearing striking resemblance to the very zombies they'd be shooting on screens. Gaming provided a getaway to an otherworld, to a different life far away from our anxiety-laden burning hellhole, and so did weed, grass, hash, pot, crack and so forth.  Every now and then we'd experiment with some new mind altering substance to experience some new sensory realities, any of them being preferrable to the actual one. Delirious, we'd imagine ourselves as characters straight out of Good Will Hunting and A Beautiful Mind, or Poe and Hemingway, and pretend to be tortured young geniuses struggling against the harsh realities of life.[^trips]

[^trips]: Psychedelic trips were the only trips we'd ever enjoy. 

Not everyone was so adept at the art of self deception. Some fell through the cracks. 

My tutorial in Absurd theatre, a course I'd taken to deepen my philosophical whirpools with authoritorial references to Existentialism and Camus and Kierkegaard, was a playhouse of some of the most curious characters I'd meet in campus, some united by their quest for meaning, others by their penchant for intellectual masturbation. I belonged to the latter kind, of course, but there were others - a Biotech major who had a Winnie-the-Pooh like disposition towards all trials and tribulations of life, a Beat Generation fan who'd run off into the wild every now and then after watching a movie by the same name, a Bong who used to remind me of Denny Crane from Boston Legal, and a nihilist who'd always walk into the class in his morning gown with his sunshades still on.  

The course ticked off all the boxes in my criteria for high culture, as I'd hoped, and helped me surround myself with a veneer of philosophical breadth, a garb of highbrow sensibility and a cleverly crafted aura of creative temperament.


One late night, almost an year after the course, the nihilist would decide that he's pretty much had it here, buy himself a rope and a bucket, lock himself in his room, and proceed to shuffle off his mortal coil.  His final note quoted a line from Edward Albee's Zoo Story, *"Sometimes a person has to go a very long distance out of his way to come back a short distance correctly."*
  
<!-- I had quite a lot on my own plate that semester - courses and classes, grades and accolades. As far as we were concerned, reflections and rememberance were for inferior beings, the common men, people who would never become anything more than a mess secretary. We were bred for a higher purpose, and emotions interfered with efficiency. -->

When I reconnected with my Bong friend later that semester, I found him crying hysterically in front of his laptop. For a moment I felt ashamed - I myself had not been so emotionally moved, even though all of us had shared a class for an entire semester, maybe even bonded over our contrasting interpretations of Beckett. My friend here, though, appeared inconsolable. His hands were shivering, even as they managed to motion me towards the news flashing on his screen. Steve Jobs was dead.

This was our Faustian deal, this is what we had become. We would hastily move on without a thought when a friend next door kicks the bucket, but cry our hearts out over the demise of some glossy ideal of social success and power we'd sold ourselves to. Our existence had shifted, as David Foster Wallace would have put it, from "a community of relationships to networks of strangers connected by self interest and contest and image." For us, Emotional Intelligence was a term non-intellectuals had come up with to compensate for their shortcomings. 



<!-- For a moment I felt ashamed - I myself had not been so emotionally moved, even though we had shared a class for an entire semester and bonded over our contrasting interpretations of Beckett, but that was unnecessary.  -->



<!-- 
 I felt ashamed - I myself had not been so emotionally moved, even though we had shared a class for an entire semester and bonded over our contrasting interpretations of Beckett. I

But so hadn't the Bong. It was not the death of our mutual friend, it was the news of Steve Jons' demise that had set off the waterworks.


The weight was off my shoulders, but a new sort bitterness, self-hatred had begin in my self. -->
***

Two years later I am in the examination hall, at the other end of a question which goes like “The director of India's National Knowledge Commission is to draft the government's policy on Innovation, and has sought your expertise. What would you advice, and why?” 

Of course, I hadn't got a clue. It was just the kind of question we used to fear - open ended, and requiring original thought. We had spent four years navigating our way through the maze of courses - optimizing for grades, minimizing for contact hours and inputs needed, selecting for lenient professors, and ensuring that there's a mix of sincere classmates whose assignment we'd copy, regular attendess who'd give us attendance by proxy, and a minimum quota of laid-back folks who'd in general lighten up the class. We had certainly become adept at avoiding courses which threw such questions at us.


 I try remembering how I had ended up in this course in the first place.  It wasn't for grades - this one had a bad reputation in that regard. What was it, then? Slowly, it all came back to me. Someone, I think it was Ketan, had mentioned that the professor was known to treat his students to drinks every now and then. That had put it in my radar. And then this charming girl, a friend of a friend, had told me she was going to take it next semester. Where is she now? I havn't really seen her at all in class. Bloody evolutionary instincts.

 But I am not the one to give up. I make up sentences interspersed with phrases like “investing in human resource”, “lessons from the Asian tigers”, "technology transfer” and “leapfrogging”, cite examples of Green and White revolutions, and get the heck out of there. Before darting off, I manage to throw in a graph correlating the number of PhD graduates vs a country's GDP. I think Ketan had mentioned that this professor has a weakness for graphs.

 
 Not all my friends are writing the exams. Most of them are nearing their graduation, and hence preparing for job interviews in small study groups, each consisting of four to five people. In reality, these groups were more like therapy groups where everyone would sit in a circle and bite their nails and collectively fret over their future.

 I was to graduate an year later, so I get an outside view of how everyone arrives at their dream future. My high school friend, a JEE[^JEE] topper who spent the better part of his undergrad years professing his love for Maths, and who had represented India at the International Mathematics Olympiad and spent every summer doing number-theoretic research, first develops an obsession for finance. In the following months, he would accept a job offer from an investment bank, have an epiphany that what he *really* wants is a Masters in Business Administration, and fly off to Bangalore to interview with a B-School. Having an MBA offer in the bag, he'd lose interest in that too, dabble with the prospect of joining the civil services, and eventually join a tech giant in the Silicon Valley. In him, Groucho Marx would have found a kindred spirit.[^marx] 

Some of my other friends are less confused. Shuchi loves literature and want to be a writer someday. Her boyfriend, Nakul, is passionate about machine learning. He has a concrete plan for himself too - after graduation, he'd do research in Network Science with a professor in Santa Barbara. Ketan, on the other hand, is into energy policy, and has spent an entire year assessing the cost effectiveness of solar energy in India. Sachit, a director in the Entrepreneurship Development Cell, can't wait to test his own start-up ideas out in the market. And Spoorti, the most unorthodox of them all, has found her calling in neuroscience. She's written fan mails to VS Ramachandran and Oliver Sacks, attended conferences on autism, and wants to research neurological disorders in San Diego.

So obviously, all of them join big-ticket consulting firms to fullfil their dreams. 

***

<!-- In the world of relentless upward intellectual mobility, the scholarship was like a bullet train with nitroboosters. -->

An year later, I found myself asking the same question: What next? 

I was barely above average, but I possessed a sociological imagination and understood how our class system works. There are regular trains which take you from one strata of society to the next, and one has to merely ensure that he has the right strategy and sufficient luck to bag a ticket.  In our socio-meritocratic world of sluggish intellectual mobility, these trains were like automobiles with nitro boosters. I had boarded many of them throughout my life -  from my local primary school to the most prestigious school in the city, and another one from that school to the most prestigious college in the country.  I just had to find my next train.

My friends had found already their train. The big-ticket consulting firms did, in fact, give you a *ticket*. They would take you to the next station, where there would be other trains waiting for you - the Harvards and the Whartons and the like. 

If the machinations of our education system were crystal clear to me when I was young, they were even clearer now. In the old order, upward social mobility might have depended on your proximity to royalty. In the modern capitalistic economy, it might have depended on your proximity to the wealthy. But in our postmodern meritocracy, it depended solely on the prestige of your alma-mater, your old-boys network, the sticker on your car.


Tonight,  I'm staring down the application for the prestigious Rhodes Scholarship to Oxford. I've found out that one could use the colonial wealth  amassed by exploiting black slaves in the diamond mines of Africa to buy their ticket to the upper class, and I want in. 

“How do you aspire to change your contry's future?”, the application asks, and I'm struggling for words. Clueless, I redirect the question to my roommate from first year - a Programming Whiz who's self-admitted biggest ambition in life was to 'raise a family'.  He gives it a long thought. And then responds, “I don't aspire”.

Atleast he is honest. I reinterpret the question as “Weave a story out of your life which would maximize the likelihood of you getting this scholarship, with the likelihood function depending on how the story reflects moral fibre, leadership potential, and intellectual vitality", and write about how I wanted to “leverage the power of data-driven algorithmic techniques to inform India's economic policy”. 

Of course, just like the Republic Day essay I'd written when I was 8, I wasn't really sure what that meant.

***

"What is the logic in reading for... " <*coughs*> "what is it...yes yes...a degree in Philosophy, Politics and Economics, having majored in Maths and Computing?" 

The interviewer wasn't one of the refined, straight laced gentlemen from Oxford, the kind that know the difference between the Windsor and the Eldredge, but an old professor from DU, wearing rubber slippers and horn-rimmed glasses that kept slipping. Other that the glasses, he also wore a smirk across his face, a crooked smile which had a political undercurrent to it. Certainly not the interviewer I had expected, or was hoping for.

Multiple stories in parallel have been shaping up inside my head. I could start off with my mother - you can't go wrong with mothers - who, being  an econ grad and a policy professional, inculcated in me a desire to change this country by following in her footsteps. Or I could talk about my paper in Artificial Intelligence, and tie it up with notions of rationality, Philosophy of Mind and Behavioral Economics.  Maybe I could quote Galileo on the book of Nature being written in the language of Mathematics, and how my thesis research, full of elegant mathematical truths, spurred me to meditate on deeper underlying questions about the universe. I could further cite examples of Russel, Frege and Ayer, who shared a similar path. Or Penrose and his theory that the universe is computable. Or Hofstadter on how recursive processes are responsible for the evolution of consciousness. I could weave a number of stories, each equally compelling. 

None of them, of course, true. 

The truth. I wanted to cavort with young titled aristrocratic British gentry, PPE at Oxford being an immensely popular course among that breed.

When it comes to interviews, Honesty is not the best policy. 

"With all due respect, *Sir*, I believe that interdisciplinary migrations are not only important, but central to new ideas." Caught between multiple narratives, I ended up not choosing any.

The old professor sniggered, a very short laugh, which reminded me of Dolores Umbridge.

"But it's not even a postgraduate degree. It's a second BA." He held up my application, and waved it in front of me, as if he were about to throw it out of the window.

"I think you're completely missing the point. No one told Adam Smith that no, you’re a moral philosopher, you ought not to produce a work of Economics. Kahnemann was a Psychologist, and he went on to win the Nobel in Economics. Einstein was a patent clerk, when he had his *Annus Mirabilis*. Louis de broglie was no Phd student, either..." 

I had gone too far. I should step back.

"...I believe, *Sir*, that degrees are meant to facilitate, and not restrict, learning," I finished off.

By this time, my application was already on the floor. "You should fly off to the States, like all you IITians do. Why bother coming to UK?"

"I believe that politically marked distinctions should have little to do with the enterprise of research and pursuit of knowledge," I immediately retorted.

It was a clash of personalities, and I wasn't helping my case. 

"You IITians are so full of yourselves.  You carry yourself with a supercilous disregard for others. Your research is useless. You believe your brand name will act like a magic carpet and carry you to any prestigious international univesity. Let me tell you something. These universities, of authentic international repute, are not like yours. They look at real substance, the complete package. Not just a some random entrance test, not at one-day wonders. Answer me. How can you even think you have it in you to get in? Answer me!" The professor had become cranky and lost all sense of decorum.

*Act Natural*, is what I was told. *Act Natural*, is what I tell myself. 

"Daniel Kahnemann had noted that he hasn't met an academic who didn't considerably overestimate the value of his research. I believe that for academics and entrepreneurs, and for all those who are in fields where success rates are low but rewards high, it is necessary to possess a sort of irrational belief in their own abilities. Without such optimism, or overoptimism if you say, the likelihood of success would decrease even further, in a self-fullfilling prophetic way. I belong to the same species. I believe my unique background would help me frame economic policies which are scientific, mathematically informed, backed by data, and implemented with practical and philosophical considerations.  Most of our economic problems are not due to scarcity of natural resources, like those of many other developing countries, but due to the lack of robust and sound economies policies. You can look at coal block allocation. Or telephone spectrum auctions. Or oil and natural gas pricing. There so many potentially interesting areas to work in. There are 1.2 billion people in this country. And every tiny improvement we achieve can potentially improve the lives of millions. Do I have it in me to get in? I don't know. I have the belief. I certainly have the potential. But with or without this scholarship, I would definitely try make a substantial difference to lives of people in our country, if not the world"
 
I listened to what I had just said, out of the blue, and I realised, for the first time in my life, that I really wanted to be this person.

<!-- After a few months weaving his way across my study desk, the spider finally displayed some sense and sensibility in committing himself to some remote inconspicuous corner. Where he rested, blissfully ignorant of everything, alone and comfortable in the new cobwebs he had excreted for himself.

He thinks of hanging himself with his own cobwebs. He knows he can get out of the cobwebs, and roam around freely on his 6 legs. But does he want to? Within his webbing, he is safe and secure. Outside, he is all alone, darting here and there, in madness, and in existential agony. -->

***


It is said that your entire life flashes in front of your eyes when you die. I don't know about that. But what I do know is that when you graduate, your entire educational flashes in front of your eyes.

If there's any emotion which rules over our meritocracy, it's anxiety. All of us are so used to running throughout our life, but after graduation, we are without a race. Everyone is lost. It is no wonder that so many of the students get into preparing for the Common Admission Test[^CAT], or the Civil Services exam. If there were any other highly selective, hyper-competitive standardised examination around, I can wager that somewhere, in some corner, there'd be an IITD grad preparing for it.

Far from satisfactory, our education system is stratifactory. We are not like scholars bubbling with creativity and curiosity, but more like machines following well-trodden paths and well-blazed trails of success. We are not adventurers on a quest for learning, but commodified products on a conveyor belt. The skills we gain are not as much as analytical as they are rhetorical. *Acting naturally*, we become, in our ironic self-conscious conformism, literally and figuratively, oxymorons.

Instead of being seekers of knowledge, we end up being slaves of prestige. 
I look towards our illustrious alumnis: student union presidents getting embroiled in corporate fraud, snotty professors turning into right-wing maniacs, wannabe writers churning out horrible novels in the name of promoting English to the middle class, and I wonder if it was always like this. 

Certainly not. There are others. Prodigious economists fighting inflation, enterpreneus changing the face of ecommerce, activists fighting corruption, scientists coming up with cutting edge research, and so forth.

It is said that India is a country where people first become engineers, and then think what they really want to become. That's partly true, but that's only half the story.  We always have a choice. It depends on us - how we align ourseves in our socio-meritrocratic atmosphere, and what we decide to do with our lives. 

And in the end, the biggest battles we fight are be the ones we fight against ourselves.

***

*This story is fictional.*

***

<!-- 
#### Author's Note

If, to quote Northrop Frye again, we go to see Macbeth to learn what a man feels like after he has gained a kingdom and lost his soul, Balinese go to cockfights to find out what a man, usually composed, aloof, almost obsessively self-absorbed, a kind of moral autocosm, feels like when, attacked, tormented, challenged, insulted, and driven in result to the extremes of fury, he has totally triumphed or been brought totally low. The whole passage, as it takes us back to Aristotle (though to the Poetics rather than the Hermeneutics), is worth quotation:
But the poet [as opposed to the historian]. Aristotle says, never makes any real statements at all. certainly no particular or specific ones. The poet's job is not to tell you what happened, but what happens: not what did take place, but the kind of thing that always does take place. He gives you the typical, recurring, or what Aristotle calls universal event. You wouldn't go to Macbeth to learn about the history of Scotland--you go to it to learn what a man feels like after he's gained a kingdom and lost his soul. When you meet such a character as Micawber in Dickens, you don't feel that there must have been a man Dickens knew who was exactly like this: you feel that there's a bit of Micawber in almost everybody you know, including yourself. Our impressions of human life are picked up one by one, and remain for most of us loose and disorganized. But we constantly find things in literature that suddenly coordinate and bring into focus a great many such impressions, and this is part of what Aristotle means by the typical or universal human event.

If I were to read Artifically Intelligent, I wouldn't be surprised if *Artificially Intelligent* brings about a knee-jerk reaction in its readers, emotional - schools part of identity. It brings about a bit of soul-searching.

There is a reason that the story is a fiction. 
Fiction - the role of fiction is to carve out the world in such a way so that it forces us to see some truths which we otherwise wont see. The India education system isn't lost, but it is in the danger of treadring the path of America's meritocracy, such as ellicitd by Walter Kirn and William Dereciewize.It is only in bringing out such realities, which barely existed before but have started existing, that we can really see where we are heeaded. 

Why do we treasure the IIT Brand such much? Does the branding help us, or does it help India? I think most of us know the answer to the question, but wouldn't acknowledge it. The dilution of the IIT brand should not be a criticism of the government's move to set up more IITs. Yes, it will dillute the brand, but that wouldn't affect India's economy or society in the negative. It will only negatively affect us and what we see as future us, the meritocratic upper class. 
It is also important to be able to laugh at yourself. One of the best test of characters of a man I know is how he reacts to self-deprecatory humour. 

The most beautiful pictures are those of which one dreams when one is smoking a pipe in bed but which one never paints.’ And yet one must tackle such pictures, however incompetent one may feel in the presence of the inexpressible perfection and triumphant splendour of nature.
crystallization of the impostor syndrome.
verisimilitude
One of the unintended side effects
This is not about campus politics, nor about love stories. This is not about what sells. This is about the untold that needs to be told.
Just like method actors assimilate the character they are supposed to be playing into their very identities, it also felt like I had been living the book just in order to write it. It is a story I wanted to write than the story I saw. Much like the pensieve reified the memories in Harry Potter, this story reifies certain tendencies. These tendencies are not a universal human characteristic, but something brought about by the way our culture and society are shaping up. So it is important to tell these stories, to make these abstract patterns concrete, give them form, so that we can tackle them better, we can see them, recognize them, and acknowledge them . A novel is the mapping of a writer’s experience onto a waking dream,-->


[^race]: Students from my old school eventually topped the year-end standardised exams, an honour which all the other schools craved for. My new school saw the world differently. It had lost the superficial race which these other schools had framed and constructed, but its students were already ahead in the real, long journey which marks our meritocratic social life.

[^chesterfield]: “Observe it, the vulgar often laugh, but never smile, whereas well-bred people often smile, and seldom or never laugh. A witty thing never excited laughter, it pleases only the mind and never distorts the countenance...Frequent and loud laughter is the characteristic of folly and ill-manners; it is the manner in which the mob express their silly joy at silly things; and they call it being merry. In my mind there is nothing so illiberal, and so ill-bred, as audible laughter.” *Letters to His Son on the Art of Becoming a Man of the World and a Gentleman*, Lord Chesterfield

[^reevaluation]: She later got her answer sheets revaluated, and her marks were increased.



[^matriculation]: Matriculation in India refers to the the final year of high school.

[^uncle]: as one of my uncles once addressed me as.


[^por]: Positions of Responsibility 

[^gender]: IITD had a gender ratio of 5:1.

[^final]: about anything.

[^resume]: and solemnly resume my defensive duties. Read: Dr. Strangelove: How I learnt to stop caring and love the defensive duties.

[^marx]: "Please resign me as a member. I don't want to belong to any club that will accept people like me as a member"

[^JEE]: Joint Entrance Examination

[^mama]: Maternal uncle

[^CAT]: An entrance test to get into IIMs: premier B-Schools of India.
