---
layout: post-journal
title: Perform
date:   2015-07-11 09:00:11
tag: Lessons from Improvisational Theatre
categories: guide
excerpt: The art of getting things done 
permalink: /perform
comments: false

---


* **Excellence is mundane**.  Excellence is accomplished through the doing of actions, ordinary in themselves, performed consistently and carefully, habitualized, compounded together, added up over time. The action in itself is nothing special, the care and consistency with which it is made is special.
    * [Mundanity of Excellence](https://fermatslibrary.com/s/the-mundanity-of-excellence-an-ethnographic-report-on-stratification-and-olympic-swimmers)
    * [Discipline](https://firstround.com/review/the-founders-guide-to-discipline-lessons-from-fronts-mathilde-collin/)
    
----

- **Identify as a winner**. If you identify as an athlete, and you talk to yourself and others with that expectation, then that is much more effective than "I need to get in better shape". When you identify with something it compels your actions, almost by default, much more than willpower alone. [Link](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=18938860)

---

- [The correct response to uncertainty is *not* half-speed](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/FMkQtPvzsriQAow5q/the-correct-response-to-uncertainty-is-not-half-speed)

----

- **Make ullyses pact**: make others hold you accountable, announce 

----


* **Reimagine the task** You can also make your task itself more appealing, more engaging, by looking at it in a different light. Even if a task at first seems boring, look for the variabilities. Look for the uncertainty.

> “My friend Ian Bogost is a professor at Georgia Tech, and he studies play. It's fascinating. He wrote a book called Play Anything. What he said is that you can make any task into play and to make it fun by looking for the variability inside the task.“Even if a task at first seems boring, look for the variabilities. Look for the uncertainty,” says Eyal. “Look for what might be different. You might time yourself. You might see if you can do it a little differently. You might see if you can do it a little bit better.”

---

- **Block out distractions by bundling them to a preplanned time.**


> Deep Work: “Professional activity performed in a state of distraction-free concentration that push your cognitive capabilities to their limit. These efforts create new value, improve your skill, and are hard to replicate.”
"Deep Work" by Cal Newport. It completely changed how I view my work, and how I spend my time, more than any other generic self-help book I've come across. It isn't the usual "delete Facebook, and everything will be fine" blog post. The main take-away for me is making a well-defined separation between "busy"/"shallow" work and "deep" work. This takes the form of spending long, uninterrupted periods engaged in deep work (e.g. academic research), with shorter periods allocated for shallow work (e.g. checking and responding to emails). I have managed to allocate one day per week for myself where I completely turn off WiFi, allowing me to focus on whatever task I choose. This means not accepting the temptation to respond to interruptions from instant messaging apps, email, news websites, etc., and it has worked wonders for my productivity! For me, it serves as a weekly reminder of the insane amount of content I consume while online, along with the (highly expensive) constant context-switching I must perform to do this.

-----

* **Just show up**

    * Walk, run, bike, skip to the places that you need to be.
    * Motivation is not a prerequisite for showing up.
    * Start your day with what is important.
    * Use rituals to get things going.
    * Showing up to help others is already service.
    * Change your vantage point and refresh your mind.
    * Location, location, location--in real estate and in life.
    * Be on time for the sake of others.
    * Show up on time for yourself. Lost time is never found.

-----

* **Start anywhere**. 
    * All starting points are equally valid.
    * Begin with what seems obvious.
    * Once it is under way any task seems smaller.
    * When speaking in public don't use a script. Write down questions and answer them.
    * Talk to your audience. Don't give a lecture.
    * Trust your mind.
    * Edit and develop ideas *as* you speak.



> He’d been innovating extensively. He’d been having trouble with students who had nothing to say. At first he thought it was laziness but later it became apparent that it wasn’t. They just couldn’t think of anything to say.
One of them, a girl with strong-lensed glasses, wanted to write a five-hundred-word essay about the United States. He was used to the sinking feeling that comes from statements like this, and suggested without disparagement that she narrow it down to just Bozeman
....
It just stumped him. Now he couldn’t think of anything to say. A silence occurred, and then a peculiar answer: “Narrow it down to the main street of Bozeman.” It was a stroke of insight
....
He was furious. “You’re not looking!” he said. A memory came back of his own dismissal from the University for having too much to say. For every fact there is an infinity of hypotheses. The more you look the more you see. She really wasn’t looking and yet somehow didn’t understand this.
He told her angrily, “Narrow it down to the front of one building on the main street of Bozeman. The Opera House. Start with the upper left-hand brick.”
Her eyes, behind the thick-lensed glasses, opened wide. She came in the next class with a puzzled look and handed him a five-thousand-word essay on the front of the Opera House on the main street of Bozeman, Montana. “I sat in the hamburger stand across the street,” she said, “and started writing about the first brick, and the second brick, and then by the third brick it all started to come and I couldn’t stop. They thought I was crazy, and they kept kidding me, but here it all is. I don’t understand it.”
Neither did he, but on long walks through the streets of town he thought about it and concluded she was evidently stopped with the same kind of blockage that had paralyzed him on his first day of teaching. She was blocked because she was trying to repeat, in her writing, things she had already heard, just as on the first day he had tried to repeat things he had already decided to say. She couldn’t think of anything to write about Bozeman because she couldn’t recall anything she had heard worth repeating. She was strangely unaware that she could look and see freshly for herself, as she wrote, without primary regard for what had been said before. The narrowing down to one brick destroyed the blockage because it was so obvious she had to do some original and direct seeing.
He experimented further. In one class he had everyone write all hour about the back of his thumb. Everyone gave him funny looks at the beginning of the hour, but everyone did it, and there wasn’t a single complaint about “nothing to say.”
In another class he changed the subject from the thumb to a coin, and got a full hour’s writing from every student. In other classes it was the same. Some asked, “Do you have to write about both sides?” Once they got into the idea of seeing directly for themselves they also saw there was no limit to the amount they could say. It was a confidence-building assignment too, because what they wrote, even though seemingly trivial, was nevertheless their own thing, not a mimicking of someone else’s. Classes where he used that coin exercise were always less balky and more interested.
As a result of his experiments he concluded that imitation was a real evil that had to be broken before real rhetoric teaching could begin. This imitation seemed to be an external compulsion. Little children didn’t have it. It seemed to come later on, possibly as a result of school itself. -- Robert Pirsig

-----



* **Act now**
    * The essence of improving is action.
    * Act in order to discover what comes next.
    * You don't need to feel like doing something to do it.
    * Schedule a difficult task and stick to your timetable.
    * Invite a buddy to join you in doing what you need to do.
    * Do the hard things first.
    * To find a new perspective, try doing something a different way.
    * Sometimes *not doing* is what is needed.
    * If you can't get out of it, *get into it*.
    * Don’t believe in getting into the zone.

> The ego is the enemy of the imagination. Anything that you think about writing when you're not writing, is a product of the ego and is absolutely wrong. One hundred percent, all the time, wrong. And if take a step back and think how much time you spend trying to purify yourself in order to get ready to write, that's like 95% of the time. And the reason for that is the ego has a stake in perpetuating the behavior that you've already engaged in. We do not think our way to right action; we act our way to right thinking.
So what I do is I start writing. If I think about my writing before I start to write, what I'm really doing is justifying not writing, because ... I'm not writing. ... I'm going to find a way to keep not writing. So what I say is I don't have the idea yet; it's not fully realized yet... Not only that: I don't have pencils; my pencils are not sharpened; I don't have the right notebook. ... Whoa! Eleven-forty five already. Time for lunch.
... When you think about exercising, what you invariably say to yourself is, "You know, I'm too fat. What's the point? I'm too old; I'm too fat; I'm too old; I'm too slow; I'm too this; I'm too that..." And all you're doing is justifying the fact that you're not exercising.
People went to “get in the zone,” because they hope to write something inspired or perfect or smart immediately. I don’t know any professional writers who expect that.
Instead, we just start writing and let whatever garbage we spew out land on the page or screen. Then make a second draft. Then a third, and so on, each time, pruning away a bit more of the garbage, keeping the few gems that somehow found their way into the garbage can, and shaping some of the semi-garbage into something useful. - 
“Getting into the zone” is not writing. When I want to write, I write. When I don’t want to write, I write. Because that’s what writers do. TV writer David Milch, creator of “Deadwood.”

-----


* **Stay on course. Go Bird by Bird**
    * Every improvisation has a point.
    * Don't let feelings alone run your show.
    * There is meaning in everything we do, even small tasks.
    * Keep an eye on where you are going. If you miss the target, adjust your aim.
    * Ask often "What is my purpose?"
    * What would not get done if you were not here?
    * Decide what you want to do and work incrementally towards achieving that.
> When I know what needs to get done, even if it's tedious, it's not so bad to put my nose to the grindstone and work through it. But when I'm not sure how to approach a task, suddenly every distraction in the world is more appealing.
You often see the suggestion to break up big tasks into smaller, baby step chunks to avoid this analysis paralysis

----

* **Focus on the 20% of actions needed to accomplish 80% of what matters.** This rule might sound like a cliché, but sometimes the biggest truths hide under the obvious reasons. A windmill might look like it’s spinning so fast, but still it doesn’t go anywhere.ough, let go and focus on expanding your strengths.  Don’t confuse action with motion .  Instead of running around in circles, take clear action steps towards your purpose. Feeling like you are always doing so much and keeping yourself busy is a waste of energy.



----


Structured procrastination

- [Steinbeck Working Days](https://www.brainpickings.org/2015/03/02/john-steinbeck-working-days/)

-----


**Software Engineering as Peforming**

* Start screen recording software and dictate your thoughts as you go through the research/brainstorming phase. Don't often go back and view the recorded sessions, it's the act of recording and speaking out loud that helps.

* Comment driven development. Stub out functions just with comments, write deeper comment blocks inside a procedure where you have a rough idea of what needs to happen. I paste in table and API definitions as comments too, to avoid having to flip to a different screen which inevitably leads to distraction. Once the program is completely laid out in comment form, and compile/runs with just "STARTING" and "STOPPING" displaying, then I start implementing what's in the comments outside-in (from highest to lowest level). I run the program frequently while doing this, each successful compile/run is a small dopamine hit. As I'm going through, remove any comments that are duplicated by code - all that should remain are comments explaining "why".