---
layout: post-journal
title: How to get stuff done
date:   2015-07-11 09:00:11
tag:
categories: journal
excerpt: 
permalink: /done
comments: false

---

Lessons from Improvisational Theatre

**Just show up**

* Walk, run, bike, skip to the places that you need to be.
* Motivation is not a prerequisite for showing up.
* Start your day with what is important.
* Use rituals to get things going.
* Showing up to help others is already service.
* Change your vantage point and refresh your mind.
* Location, location, location--in real estate and in life.
* Be on time for the sake of others.
* Show up on time for yourself. Lost time is never found.



**Start anywhere**
* All starting points are equally valid.
* Begin with what seems obvious.
* Once it is under way any task seems smaller.
* When speaking in public don't use a script. Write down questions and answer them.
* Talk to your audience. Don't give a lecture.
* Trust your mind.
* Edit and develop ideas *as* you speak.

Before they start doing anything, great improvisers focus on the big picture. The details will follow spontaneously once they start improvising and experimenting. If you want to plan all the details in advance, you will spend a lot of time only to discover that reality is more resilient than you thought. It is only through experimentation that you will find out what does and doesn’t work. Practice exploration and discovery. 

**Act now**

* The essence of improving is action.
* Act in order to discover what comes next.
* You don't need to feel like doing something to do it.
* Schedule a difficult task and stick to your timetable.
* Invite a buddy to join you in doing what you need to do.
* Do the hard things first.
* To find a new perspective, try doing something a different way.
* Sometimes *not doing* is what is needed.
* If you can't get out of it, *get into it*.

**Stay on course. Go Bird by Bird**

* Every improvisation has a point.
* Don't let feelings alone run your show.
* There is meaning in everything we do, even small tasks.
* Keep an eye on where you are going. If you miss the target, adjust your aim.
* Ask often "What is my purpose?"
* What would not get done if you were not here?
Decide what you want to do and work incrementally towards achieving that.

Don’t confuse action with motion .  Instead of running around in circles, take clear action steps towards your purpose. Feeling like you are always doing so much and keeping yourself busy is a waste of energy. Focus on the 20% of actions needed to accomplish 80% of what matters. This rule might sound like a cliché, but sometimes the biggest truths hide under the obvious reasons. A windmill might look like it’s spinning so fast, but still it doesn’t go anywhere.ough, let go and focus on expanding your strengths. 

