---

layout: post-journal
title: My work at Opera
date:   2014-07-25 09:00:11
tag:
categories: journal
excerpt: 
permalink: /opera

---

I joined Opera, a multinational big-data analytics firm, following my graduation from IIT Delhi  It was an entry-level role as an analytics specialist and my first full-time job.


Opera offered some freedom to choose the team which you wanted to work in. After some deliberatiom, I chose to join Lalit Bansal in the Global Markets division. The role was product-oriented.  Our flagship product was a cloud-based application suite, Mobiuss, which enabled portfolio construction, valuation and risk management for mortgage markets.

**Mobiuss**

Mobiuss was a suite of web-based products, with three different products for three customer segments. Mobiuss Resi catered to Residential Whole Loans, Mobiuss RMBS for residential mortgage backed securities,[^RMBS] and Mobiuss CRE for Commercial Real Estate. Our clients were investment managers in big banks (e.g. Deutsche Bank) who were interested in valuating portfolios of financial instruments based on their risk profile.  

[^RMBS]:  A residential mortgage-backed security (RMBS) is a reference to the general package of financial agreements that typically represents cash yields that are paid to investors and that are supported by cash payments received from homeowners who pay interest and principal according to terms agreed to with their lenders; it is a funding instrument created by the "originator" or "sponsor" of the mortgage loan; without cross-collateralizing individual loans and mortgages (because it would be impossible to receive permission from individual homeowners), it is a funding instrument that pools the cash flow received from individuals and pays these cash receipts out with waterfall priorities that enable investors to become comfortable with the certainty of receipt of cash at any point in time.

A client would upload a portfolio of loans or mortgage backed securities, and they they would be able a forecast of their performance under different macroeconomic scenarios. One could also adjust the granularity of the data: whether it is loan level or aggregated. For each loans our algorithms would predict the key attributes of default rate, delinquencies, loss severity, prepayment including several others. [^aurora]

[^aurora]: This was very similar to the work I later did at Aurora. Just replace financial portfolios with energy power plants, financial instrument type  by power plant type: loan, mortgage backed securities etc. by coal, wind, solar,  volatility in house prices with volatility in power generation, portfolio valuation with electricity price.

My responsibilities were varied. 

I was tasked with overseeing the data loading process.  We had third party vendors which we sourced huge amounts of data from.  We would load this data every month - and the process would take more than 24 hours. I had to go over the data loading scripts to see if any optimizations were possible. 

I also worked with the design team for Mobiuss Resi and prepared mockups for its next iteration - which, at the time I thought was pretty good work, but I later came to know that my mockups were not used in the final design.   For the launch of the product, I wrote the user manual. 


**Monthly Reports**


The Global Markets team regularly glean insights from the data we collected and published studies on them. This was 2013. A year before, [Hurricane Sandy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hurricane_Sandy) had ravaged the states of New York and New Jersey in the US. I did a study on the impact of the hurricane on bond markets and reported it to Bill Hunt, who was the head of global markets. 

Our team had created a surveillance dashboard to monitor the performance of the deals and loans from the neighbourhoods most affected by flooding. 

 Our loan-level data contained zip codes. The US postal zip codes were superimposed on the post-storm flooding survey map. Deals which had exposure above certain threshold of loan value were filtred. Overall, we identified 45 deals which had roughly $6 billion of exposure. 

These deals were then ran through our credit model, their performance forecasted with the help the same algorithm which was used in Mobiuss forecasts (which used Monte Carlo simulations). 

The team used data from Hurricane Katrina (which had hit Louisiana in 2005) as benchmark. During Katrina, heavy flood damage displaced much of the population, resulting in a huge increase in severe delinquencies that remained above baseline levels for two years.  Counteracting the spike in delinquencies was a corresponding surge in loan prepayments, mainly driven by government disaster relief and insurance payouts. As a result, there were smaller peaks in foreclosures and subsequent liquidations that nevertheless produced some stress.

In our forecast,  the 60+ delinquency rates increased as expected. However the size of the increase was a fraction of what was experienced after Katrina in 2005. Delinquency rates increased by 10%  and 15%. By contrast, the same figure for Katrina was at 1100%. So it was unlikely the effect of Sandy on bond markets would be as severe

Most of the research had already been done by our excellent researchers: my responsbility was purely to extract the actual data that had come in one year after the hurricane and compare how our forecasts had done. 

It turned out that that the actual performance matched the forecasts pretty well. I reported my analysis to Bill Hunt, our head of research, who seemed pretty happy with the accuracy of our model.  


**Summary**

I worked at Opera for just seven months. I had a very small impact: most of the time I was distracted with application for higher studies. Even so, I learnt a lot: how to form assumptions and extract relevant data to do macroeconomic analysis, how web-based products work behind the scenes, and how large swaths of data can be used for forecasts and thus add value. 

***

 
*If you would like to talk about macroeconomic analysis using big-data, please don't hesitate to reach out to me.* 


***



