---
layout: post-journal
title: Manage
date:   2019-03-21 09:00:11
tag:  
categories: guide
excerpt: 
permalink: /manage
comments: false

---
[How do you supervise programmers if you don't program yourself?](https://www.quora.com/How-do-you-supervise-programmers-if-you-dont-program-yourself/answer/Bruce-Taylor-69?ch=10&share=d086cafa&srid=3HW0)
*Management:*

Leadership is the art of getting people to want to do what you know must be done. 

One day, a sign appeared on a soda fridge in RedWest saying something to the effect of, “Did you know that drinks cost Microsoft [ed: millions of dollars] a year? Sodas are your perk at work. Don’t bring them home.” This depressed me on too many levels to enumerate, but I’ll toss out a few:

We used to get Dove Bars and beers all the time. It felt like free food was on offer at least once a week, usually with a pretense of some small milestone to celebrate. Why did we cut stuff like this? (I know the boring fiscal reasons why. I’m asking the deeper why, as in, “Was it worth the savings? Is Microsoft better now that we’ve cut these costs?”)

> I love watching exceptional people do what they’re good at. It amazes and inspires me. I once saw an alleyway chef in Shanghai turn a basketball-sized clump of dough into hand-pulled noodles for a table of eight, amid a blur of arm movements in under a minute. Ever watch speed stacking? We each have astonishing potential.

Isn’t it a neat feeling when you’re introduced to a coworker’s kids or spouse? For a moment, the bubble of work is burst. You imagine baseball games, music recitals, anniversary dinners. I remind myself of this when I get frustrated at people.

https://medium.com/@philipsu/goodbye-microsoft-hello-facebook-94a189d56830

You can control outcomes with three types of approaches: a) People Control, where you decide who to hire, who to fire, and who to put in what positions; b) Action Control, where you tell people what to do; and c) Results Control, where you define the metrics of success. Know when to use which.

Someone had enough time to get these signs professionally printed and affixed to our fridges.
It was someone’s salaried, 40-hour-a-week job to do things like this.
Someone thought soda smuggling was a big enough “problem” at Microsoft to draw attention to it.
How much soda can a person steal? How much does that same person cost the company per hour in salary and benefits? Our most interesting profits will come from capitalizing on huge opportunities, not from micromanaging costs. I’m sure some finance person will lambast me for this, which would only further depress me. Believe in our upside. Focus on our upside.

* As a leader, the things you do well and do badly get magnified throughout the team you are leading. You can see entire companies get thrashed around when the CEO can’t focus, or move slowly when the leader isn’t motivated. I am deeply aware of these effects and so the responsibility I have and the people depending on me end up giving me a lot of motivation to focus, work hard, and make good decisions.
* Also, learn how to evaluate what people are great at, and put them in those roles. (This is the most important thing I have learned about management, and I haven’t read much about it.) You want to have a reputation for pushing people hard enough that they accomplish more than they thought they could, but not so hard they burn out.
* *Executive / Board Alignment*. In a Forbes interview (http://www.forbes.com/sites/richkarlgaard/2015/01/05/vivid-vision-for-success/2/), Herold recommends having one executive read all or part of the vivid vision at the beginning of your meetings meetings with executive and board members
* As a leader, the things you do well and do badly get magnified throughout the team you are leading. You can see entire companies get thrashed around when the CEO can’t focus, or move slowly when the leader isn’t motivated. I am deeply aware of these effects and so the responsibility I have and the people depending on me end up giving me a lot of motivation to focus, work hard, and make good decisions.
* https://medium.com/@brett1211/empathetic-management-mistakes-aa0fd19a37e5
* https://www.tlnt.com/heres-why-your-employees-are-just-not-that-into-you/
* Alfred Lin’s description of what his job was when he was COO at Zappos. He said, “*I came in every day and figured out what I could make 1% better.”*  Mostly I learned by failing at these things and trying to figure out, every week, what I could be doing better. In fact, I think that’s a really good meta-lesson: you have to* focus on figuring out what you’re not doing well as a founder to get better at being a founder. That’s an every-day job, and it’s subtly different from figuring out what your company as a whole needs to be doing better.*
* If you want the folks at your company to know something (e.g. high-level company goals, product direction, etc) it’s not enough to just say it once. You have to repeat it many times and weave it into the operational rhythm of the company. At any given time, an employee at your company has so much on their plate in terms of their day-to-day job and their personal life that “that one slide in your all hands with the mission statement” isn’t going to leave much of an impression. This is something I’ve heard other founders say but I didn’t fully get it until we hit ~50 employees and observed how hard it was to keep everyone on the same page.
* How much crucial time a founder can lose on the wrong events and meetings. Especially in France, startups are in a strong hype right now, and at the beginning I attended many such events A few deadlines taught me the hard way that most, if not all, of those events are non-essential. On the other hand, a few of the right events in the valley (from YC and others) showed me just how efficient a gathering event should be. Finally, our advisor at our VC firm showed us just how useful an investor can (and should) be, if that investor pretends to be helping you. Now, me and my co-founder *deny any event/meeting without a clear gain in knowledge (first or second order through the right connections) or investor money, that can be predicted beforehand. For example, we only meet with specialists or advisors with strong relevant connections. *Knowing this beforehand would probably have saved us several month’s worth of work in the early days.
* Founders never really agreed on who's in and who's out, roles in company, who makes decisions, expectations for time, ownership of stock, side projects, budgeting and expenses. More of a leadership problem than a legal one, but legal process, properly followed, helps ensure people understand and agree before getting started.  HR mistakes: Not getting employment contracts, proprietary information agreements, harassment and discrimination, wage and hour violations, immigration visa violations, not doing payroll taxes, improperly classifying employees as contractors, not doing reference / resume checks. Lack of documentation: Ignoring / not dealing with legal matters: caused by not signing paperwork, poor record-keeping, procrastination, not having Board and shareholder approvals, trying to save cost, using online incorporation services. It can be dangerous to delay turning yourself into a company, because one or more of the founders might decide to split off and start another company doing the same thing. So when you set up the company, as well as as apportioning the stock, you should get all the founders to sign something agreeing that everyone's ideas belong to this company, and that this company is going to be everyone's only job.
* “When reflecting on his own career as an entrepreneur and investor, Reid said he wished he’d published something like The Netflix culture document (https://www.slideshare.net/reed2001/culture-1798664/37-Why_are_we_so_insistent) when starting LinkedIn.” https://www.slideshare.net/reed2001/culture-1798664/37-Why_are_we_so_insistent
* You can either give goals to your team and review and track them every week or you can set audacious goals for team, pump them and become their chief hurdle remover.
    * Replace All Clear?” with “Can you tell me what you think we agreed on?”. 
    * Replace “You know what to do?” with “Can you tell me what you're going to do?” 
    * Replace “Understood?” with “Can you explain to me what we have agreed on?”
    * Replace “Everything Ok?” with “What have you been doing? What have you read? What have you written?”
* Get an executive assistant to write emails and connect with people
* https://www.quora.com/profile/Brett-Fox-8/The-Real-Life-Adventures-of-a-Startup-CEO/How-Do-You-Keep-Your-Team-Highly-Motivated
* https://www.skysports.com/football/news/11096/11009867/johan-cruyffs-vision-lives-on-in-ruben-jongkind-and-wim-jonk. How changing incentives and focus affects training.
* *Use storytelling to make your vision more compelling; not mission-speak.* What is the one thing I need to do today to help my company accomplish its singular vision such that by doing it everything else would be easier or unnecessary? In vivid detail, the document explains what Scudamore expects the company to be like in 3 to 5 years.This description includes both quantitative details (like the number of people the company will employ and how many locations it will have) and qualitative ones (like how employees will describe the culture to their families).
    The Painted Picture was paramount in 1–800-GOT-JUNK? growing its revenues to more than $100 million, Scudamore says. He recommends the following steps (http://www.inc.com/empact/this-visualization-technique-helped-me-build-a-100m-business.html) "retreat, visualize, and ask" to create your own:
    *• Retreat:* First, grab a notebook and find a quiet space where you don’t have any distractions from your daily life.
    *• Visualize:* Transplant yourself five years into the future. See yourself looking around at your life and your business. Imagine that you’re really in that place where the future HAS already happened. For example, if you have a five-year old child, imagine your child is now ten. Then, imagine yourself five years older.
    *• Ask:* Once you’ve transported yourself to that place, ask yourself some questions that will help you “crystal ball” the future. Here are some key questions to ask yourself:
    - What is your top-line revenue?
    - How many people are on your team?
    - How would your people describe the culture of your company when talking to a family member?
    - What is the press saying about your business? Be as specific as possible: what would your local paper say about your company? What would your favorite magazine say?
    - What do your people love about your vision and where the company is headed?
    - How would a customer describe their experience with you? What would they say to their best friend?
    - What accomplishment are you most proud of? What accomplishment are your people most proud of?
    - What do you do better than anyone else on the planet?
    - Describe your office environment in detail.
    - Describe your service area. Who are your customers and how do they feel?
* http://www.football365.com/news/f365-says-brighton-huddersfield-newcastle-believe-in-the-method-not-magic



*Management Examples:*


http://www.goal.com/story/inside-the-managerial-mind-of-liverpools-jurgen-klopp/index.html


-----




https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/oct/23/marcelino-valencia-la-liga-spanish-football-sid-lowe

Marcelino García Toral, Valencia’s new manager, has a reputation for obsessing (https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/aug/28/valencia-real-madrid-marcelino-spain-la-liga-roundup) over weight and physical condition. A pioneer, even now when professional football is catching up with him, every detail controlled, tests conducted daily, weight pinned on notice boards at training grounds worldwide, he goes further. He is so strict that stories circulate of players starving themselves or starting the day in the sauna, scared of arriving a gram overweight.

“From the very first session, I could sense something different,” he said. “I don’t know, something. Not just him, all of his staff. The way we trained, the way they saw football, the way they worked, prepared games. It really struck me. And I said to myself: ‘I can’t waste a year of my career not working with this coach.’

Gabriel said: “The first time I worked with him, I thought: ‘What a pain this coach is!’” The first time his new Valencia (https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia) team-mates worked with him, they felt much the same. “We went hungry,” said the captain, Dani Parejo. There had even been arguments with his wife, he admitted.

But Gabriel knew and, soon, so did they. When Gabriel joined Arsenal he called Marcelino, his manager at Villarreal, to thank him; when Marcelino called him back this summer he didn’t even have to think about it. When Marcelino arrived at Mestalla and spoke to Parejo he didn’t have to think about it for long, either. He had intended to leave, ready to follow 16 other players out of the club, but Marcelino made him stay.

So, Parejo got to work. They all did. Within weeks, the captain was describing Marcelino as one of the two best coaches he had worked with alongside Ernesto Valverde. 

The squad had been made manageable; now he had to manage. Although some players say the serious image is exaggerated, that his demanding nature does not make him draconian, that he engages with players, reaches them and knows how to convince them, that he is likeable, his touch light at times, that Marcelino pushes them and it works. Direct and honest, he has talked about his admiration for Arrigo Sacchi and Rafa Benítez, while Diego Simeone says he identifies with him, and Marcelino insists on a building committed, competitive team. The word Gabriel used for him is “pesado”: roughly, a pain, heavy, hard work, tough going. Intelligent and intense, he wanted a squad that he could lead and that would follow him, creating a climate conducive to a change in culture.

Some of his key men had things to prove: Simone Zaza had West Ham to leave behind; Gonçalo Guedes, only 20, barely played at PSG; things didn’t entirely work out for Geoffrey Kondogbia at Inter; Rodrigo had never scored more than five league goals; Parejo had been halfway out; José Luis Gayá, like Parejo, stood accused but was given a second chance; Neto emerged from Gianluigi Buffon’s shadow. Marcelino wanted them hungry, metaphorically. And, some soon found, literally. “We got used to it,” Parejo said.

It’s not only about the weight, although that does symbolise the seriousness and it is genuinely something that people in the game talk about. Marcelino insists that the physical condition and analysis “quantifies the footballing work; it does not dictate it” and says that he doesn’t really know anything about the physical preparation – the genius is Ismael Fernández, his fitness coach – but it is fundamental and non-negotiable. Everything starts with tests that set the parameters for the season, identifying players’ optimum statistics which are monitored constantly, with fines for those who do not fulfil the criteria daily, and they work in what the coach calls “micro-cycles” that seek to maintain that. If a player’s body fat index goes over 9.5 he simply doesn’t play


The players talk of a greater intensity on the training ground and a manager in Silva who is meticulous to the point of obsession about match preparation. It reminds of his compatriot Jose Mourinho shortly after his arrival in England, whose thick dossiers for each match raised eyebrows at Stamford Bridge.

That assessment underplays Silva’s role. If this supreme away form really is just a question of “wanting to win”, it is the manager’s responsibility to inject that mentality into the players. Silva sees himself as a facilitator rather than authoritarian.

----

Build Sales Skills. If you don't ask, you won't receive. Sell themselves, they sell their ideas, they sell and motivate others to do their bidding (this is scaling). Be competent. Know your stuff, know your product or services that you are trying to sell. Know your competitors, know your customer’s alternatives well. There is no quicker way to lose credibility when you aren’t prepared and exposed to be a know-nothing bullshitter. This is perhaps the biggest reason a lot of salespeople fail. They don’t put in the work in the first place and somehow expect to wing it. Know the difference between being enthusiastic and pushy. Enthusiasm can be quite infectious, but being pushy simply means you are trying to impose your own interests, your own agenda onto others. No one likes being told, harassed, or tricked into doing anything, even if it might be in their best interests. Think of it this way, would you rather go to a party or a school assembly? 

Selling is about story telling. I don’t care what culture what country you come from, as human beings, we all share one trait, that is we enjoy stories. Great salespeople and effective leaders know this all too well. We don’t buy products or services, we buy from people. Ultimately we want to be able to relate to one another. There is no better way than to tell stories to reveal the personality of you, your product or services. I am not suggesting you make up some BS story or some canned pitch. It has to be authentic. 

What is going to motivate anyone to do something for others? For money? For vanity? For altruism? If you can’t answer that question regarding whoever you are trying to target or sell to, then you haven’t done your homework. The least you can do is to do some digging and come up with a decent pitch. So instead of can you do this and that for me, you really should be putting a bit effort, tell a compelling story when you have nothing material to offer. offer something of value before you ask for anything. sales isn't about selling a product. It is about creating value-generating relationships that enrich the lives and businesses of both parties. 


* Wherever your company lands on this sliding scale, one thing will always remain true: *you have to be able to sell your product or service.* If you don’t sell it, no one else will. You team is relying on you to explain the benefits of the company and how it’s changing the world. It’s your job as the founder to communicate that vision. And realistically, you may not have a company for long if you can’t sell. Because it’s not just about doing interviews with journalists or sitting on panels. You have to pitch your idea to VCs if you really want a shot at building your startup into a lasting business. Personally, speaking in front of people was not one of my best traits when starting ThirdLove five years ago. But I’ve spoken at hundreds of interviews, panels, and events since then. Over time, I’ve gotten much better at it. Here’s what I learned along the way: 
    * *Practice with people you feel comfortable with.*
        It’s much easier to start practicing in front of people you know. They’ll be more forgiving when you make a mistake. And hopefully, you can solicit real feedback from them about what you need to work on. You can even do this internally at your company by giving updates or announcements to a small group of people. As you get more comfortable, increase the size of the group. If you want to practice pitching a potential investor, use your network to find another founder or an unrelated investor who’s willing to listen. The goal is to find someone who can give you candid feedback about your pitch and help you improve. For me, the most difficult part of selling my vision in the beginning was the fact that it was just a concept. I didn’t have something tangible to really help me capture that vision and communicate it the way I wanted to. But once your idea becomes a reality and you have a real product, talking about your company becomes much easier. 
    * *Focus on one point.*
        I learned this the hard way. When we launched ThirdLove in 2013, our executive team was three people: my co-founder Dave, our Chief Creative Officer, Ra’el, and me. We drove around San Francisco, meeting with different reporters to do interviews about our seed round and launch. 
        None of us had done these types of interviews before. And we quickly realized we had too many people in the room. The three of us were speaking in different styles and presenting an overwhelming amount of information. Each article reflected a different angle because we were inundating the reporters with too many talking points. 
        That experience taught me an important lesson: When announcing news to the press, you should always make it about one thing. Pick one point you want to get across and stick to that core story. It’s fine to use supporting points, but keep the focus on the idea you want to see in print. 
    * *Let your personality shine through.*
        As a founder, people just want honesty from you. They want to know about you, and they want to hear the truth come out of your mouth. 
        While it’s tempting to practice 1,000 times when you’re just starting to give interviews or pitch VCs, there is such a thing as being too rehearsed. And trust me, it sounds phony. It comes off as though you’re not listening to the other side of the conversation. You don’t seem like you’re engaged on a personal level. 
        And that personal engagement is important to investors, journalists, even potential employees. People want to connect with you, and the best way to let that happen is by being your authentic self. Show them who you are, and let go of the idea that you have to perfectly memorize and deliver every word. 
        When your personality shines through and people get a sense of who you are as a human being, they’re more inclined to like you and to help you. 
    * *Know you can’t predict everything.*
        You won’t be able to plan for everything that happens in an interview or a conference room. So that means you have to get used to dealing with the unknown. 
        If you’re asked a question you’re not prepared for, don’t scramble just to come up with a quick answer. It doesn’t matter whether you’re sitting across from a journalist or a VC—just tell them you don’t know. 
        You can say, “That’s a great question. Let me have my team pull that data and get back to you.” 
        Easy as that. Now you have time to make sure your answer is correct, as well as to reflect on how you want to answer the question later on. 
        My last piece of advice is simple: Remember, you’re the expert on this subject. 
        You started this company for a reason, and you know how you’re delivering value. Don’t lose sight of the fact that you know your business better than anyone. Keep that in mind, and you’ll have all the confidence you need stepping into the spotlight. 


* I was reading the brilliant book ‘To Sell is Human’ by Dan Pink[1] (https://www.quora.com/#kdwza). In the Chapter on Pitch (which is worth more than the weight of it in gold), he talks about different kind of pitches and then says, As you prepare your pitch, whichever variety you choose, clarify your purpose and strategy by making sure you can answer these three questions:
    After someone hears your pitch . . .
    * What do you want them to *know*?
    * What do you want them to *feel*?
    * What do you want them to *do*?
* If you’ve got strong answers to these three questions, the pitch will come together more easily. I apply same to my verbal and written communication now (be it emails, a proposal, website copy, client conversation, webinar etc etc). - Am I clearly making my audience know, feel and do what I want them to? If not, I refine it. I practice it until it is serving the purpose I want it to.
* Examples-
    * *Reminding a prospect who hasn’t enrolled yet*-
        Earlier- “Please let me know if you are enrolling”
        Better yet- “I hope you have all the information you need about our services. If you have any concerns, you can reach out to me personally. Since we work with limited clients and seats are filling fast (and I don’t want you to miss any deadlines), please inform me if you want me to hold a seat for you.”
    * *Writing an informational article*-
        Earlier- “What I think of XYZ issue”
        Now- “XYZ issue is _____ (facts). It is impacting ___ in this way (what it means for the reader). I think of it as a ______ (opinion). It is becoming more critical as we do not ____. If we want to change our ___, we need to act upon _____ (call to act).”
    * *Asking for a favor* **[This is combining Dan Pink’s wisdom with Dale Carnegie’s wisdom -
        Earlier- “I am ____ and I want ____.”
        Now- “I read your __ and found ___ pertinent to blah blah. I am a ____ and can help you improve_____ by ____. If this interests you, I would love to work together as _____. Can we get on a call this week anytime between 1-3pm to discuss this?”
    * *Rejecting something*-
        Earlier- “I am sorry but this does not work.”
        Now- “I admire your ____. You have helped me by ______. Since you appreciate my ___, it is important for me to point out the problems in this proposal. I do not think it works because ___. We may do __<an alternative if relevant>___. Let me know what you think about it.”
    * *The key is that every form of communication is not about* ***me*** *but about* ***you**.* **Including this post. If the information I share here cannot help you improve and is not implementable, it is useless. You can apply this little shift of mindset to improve any form of communication.
* You may not be the best writer, best vocabularist or best grammarist - but you can care and make it all about your reader and that is all that matters truly in the end.
* P.S. An extension of this that I practice - if anything I am saying/writing is not going to make the reader feel better or helping her improve, it is better to scratch it out. I know negative thoughts, darkness have a place but that is in fiction. In real life and non-fiction, look at what is beautiful and if something is not, think of how it can be improved.


On Liverpool: Management Lessons from Football and Jurgen Klopp

https://www.bbc.com/sport/football/43860388
https://www.independent.co.uk/sport/football/european/liverpool-vs-roma-jurgen-klopp-bill-shankly-champions-league-win-goals-feature-a8320821.html

Mistaking familiarity and loyalty for competence is a sign of insecurity, and stunted, tunnel vision. When Moyes attempted to sign players from his former club Everton. Moyes was an insecure Manager. So is Mourinho (Matic, Carvalho, Paulo Ferreira, David Luiz). The difference with Mourinho

Top managers rarely look for signing their former loyalists (Klopp, Guardiola). They have a sense of strength, calm and security in their heads. They inspire the loyalty and following of new players - wherever they go. They look for talent, not familiarity or loyalty. Familiarity and loyalty are about YOU. Talent is about winning matches. When there is a gap between the two (like Moyes and Man Utd), you have to decide whether it is you who would fill that gap, or whether you are going to stay at the same place and entrust your former methods to work. When there is an actual gap, the latter is wishful thinking and delusion. Sometimes your incompetency extends to not seeing the gap in the first place. 

United never recovered. The players never recovered mentally, because they didn’t remember what winning feels like. It is important to remember what winning feels like - ask Federer or Ronaldo or Messi. You see a winner. in Morning or Guardiola. They eke out wins even when everything is against them. Mourinho is a narcissistic, but he knows how to play psychology. He understands the poison of self-doubts - especially how to feed it into the opponent. Klopp understands the poison of self-doubt as well, but he does not know how to avoid it. Klopp and the Choking syndrome. Seems like luck but it has has happened so many times that it is hard to see. Same with South Africa. 

On Signing Underdogs vs Signing Winners - on Football Heritage.

The best Winners - Federer, Ronaldo, Ibrahimovic have the feel of a clean, sharp sword. Their execution is flawless, time and again. They do not get distracted. They do not look human, because humans are flawed. 

It is not a coincidence that the golden generation of Belgium came all at once.

What makes Southampton produce prodigies so consistently?


What makes Liverpool provide great right backs?

Does not allow talk of title. 

The role of a manager is clear in football: 
Rafael Benitez, Klopp, Jupp Huyckens. 

Watford and its scouting system


To Sign:

Helena Mika
Billy Walker
Salik Warsi
Deepak Vashisht
Florian Habermacher








