---

layout: post-journal
title: My work at Jugnoo
date:   2017-07-25 09:00:11
tag:
categories: journal
excerpt: 
permalink: /jugnoo

---

Jugnoo was a hyperlocal on-demand services startup, headquartered in Chandigarh, India. 

I was hired as a product manager for the Jugnoo mobile application which allowed consumers to order rides, budget meals, restaurant food and grocery on-demand. The rides vertical alone was used by 3 million consumers in 38 indian cities;   restaurant delivery in about 21 cities; meals had just launched in Gurgaon and Jaipur in addition to Chandigarh; grocery delivery in Gurgaon and Chandigarh.

Jugnoo had a “sink or swim”  onboarding strategy. Immediately on joining, I was given a team (2 frontend engineers, 4 backend engineers, 1 designer and 1 QA engineer),  a problem statement: a subscription feature on the Jugnoo Application, and a two-week deadline to ship the first iteration

**Meals: Making food delivery operationally profitable**

At the time I joined, Jugnoo was facing the following challenges:
* The in-house meals delivery was floundering: they had achieved unit profitability but were running at a loss operationally.  After six months of experiments and toil,  it was clear they had hit a ceiling with regards to #orders/day: demand had pleateaud. The unit economics was such that a 20x increase was needed in orders to be overall profitable ( from 250 orders a day to 5000 orders a day) - an impossible task.  We had to close down the kitchen in Jaipur and shutter our expansion plans until we got the model right. 

* Average Ticket Size: Rs. 106. COGS: Rs. 50. Delivery Cost: Rs. 23.8. VAT: Rs. 13.2. Packing Material: Rs. 4.6 Unit Profit: Rs. 4.4. Fixed Cost: Rs. 8 Lakh. SLA was 90-100%. Average Orders per driver: 8. # Total Orders/Day: 250.

* The customer engagement and retention for the overall application was low.  India’s CAC to LTV (life time value for a customer) ratios are very bad. Some companies are even acquiring a transacting user for as high as Rs 1200. Why’s that so high? We pay extremely high prices to various marketing channels in addition to discounting for customer acquisition. Also, most e-commerce/transaction businesses have a traffic problem. They need to spend large amounts of capital to re-engage customers i.e. getting them to transact again on the platform.Unless customers visit the platform for something else (e.g. content, reviews, photos, and sharing) and then naturally move into the transaction flow, it is very hard to drive high re-engagement rates for commerce platforms. 
    *  Retention 10-20% after the first week, but would dwindle to 2% by weeks 3-4
* We wanted to explore further use-cases to improve retention and as well as bring growth:  become a one-stop shop for all customers on-demand needs



To increase #orders/day: Piloted the lnstant Delivery Model for Meals Delivery. We guaranteed the delivery within 20 mins by sending additional orders with the riders on a route beforehand. This was like a hub-and-spoke model.
    * Earlier Business Model: Orders were aggregated beforehand for breakfast, lunch and dinner time slots.  Ordering window was closed 15 mins before the start of a slot time and delivery personel were dispatched.
        * Pro: Allowed us to deliver meals cheap.
            * Allowed us to control delivery costs by clubbing orders together and optimising routes.
            * Wastage was less since we knew beforehand how much demand to fulfil. 
        * Con: #Orders were limited and unit margin was less.   Customers  did not plan their lunches or dinners beforehand. They expected the food within 30-40 mins of ordering. Our demographic cared for instant delivery much more than they cared for price.
    * To increase unit margin, we increased the price. Average ticket size increased from Rs. 106 to Rs. 135. 
* Customers also wanted a variable menu so we changed it day-to-day, but the flip side of it when their old favourite item was back again.  To improve retention, we introduced a favourite feature where customers would get a notification of their meal being on a menu. 
* Risk: Keep COGS in check by decreasing wastage
        * We launched early bird discount feature to order early as this would give us a reduce wastage (better idea of the routes and demand). (Rs. 50 to Rs. 54)
* Risk: SLAs: Dropped from 90% to 80%, but that was because our promised time decreased from designated times to instant delivery!
    * Traffic Controller like product for the kitchen admin, who would know which rider is where, the stock he has, and would assign incoming orders based on that. We had plans to automate this once the model was proven.


* Meals Metrics (June, 10000 orders. COGS 40% VAT 10% ) :
    * Key metrics  4x would increase profitability (From 250 to 1000). Took it to 2X (500).  
        * # Total Orders/Day: 500. Average Ticket size: 135. COGS:  Rs. 54. Delivery Cost: Rs. 34.33. VAT: Rs. 13.5. Packing Material: Rs. 1.4 Unit Profit: Rs. 31.77  Fixed Cost: Rs. 10 Lakh
        * SLA was 90-100%. Average Orders per driver: 8
    * Orders/Driver: 8-9

What is the right stock to send with a driver? Sending too little would decrease order/driver and increase the delivery costs (and might disturb the SLA), sending too much would increase wastage. 

Operations. New food items (Dabeli, Bombay Sandwich, Paneer Khurchan), Maggi Sandwich + snacks like muffins 



**Jugnoo Star: The metrics and pricing subscription product**


* Piloted Jugnoo Star Subscription in Chandigarh
    * The idea: the loss in profit on a per unit basis (due to delivery cost in grocery and cash backs in food delivery) would be made up by the increase in frequency of transactions and more retention + subscription fees.  At scale, the delivery cost would decrease. 
    * Launched with benefits and pricing from hunch, iterated based on data and revised pricing.
    * More than 50 Customer Feedback calls.
    * Improved Funnel (From option to choose between annual/monthly at the beginning to option later)
    * Customer lifetime User journey: Defined touchpoints for email, reminder puishes.


* Grew Jugnoo Star experiment to 65 subscribers in Chandigarh
    * 29 Monthly , 36 Annual. 6.96% Retention monhtly
    * Change in orders/month:  6.35 in monthly, 7.28 in annual
    * ARPU/month: Rs. 163 for monthly subscription, Rs. 81 for annual
    * Cost of Star benefits/Month: Rs. 84/mo for monthly users, Rs. 166/mo for annual users
    * Rs. 135/mo for monthly.  Rs.48/month for annual
    * ROI/month: Rs. 236 in monthly users, -Rs. 36 in annual uses


**New Verticals: AskLocal and Jugnoo Pros**

* Launched new verticals: Jugnoo Pros (on demand services) and AskLocal (on-demand answers)
* Other Features: Login Signup via FB Account Kit, Payment via UPI, Referral,  Menus One-click Filter & Checkout Slider
* Driver app: Driver App: Self Enrollment, Resources (Training Module, Ticketing



* AskLocal to 3000+ users posting 10 posts/ day and DAU/MAY of 5.68%. Jugnoo Pros enrolled a plumber
* The scope of my responsibilities increased 3x: from a team of 5 to a team of 15 including Android, iOS and backend engineers, QA engineers, designers and junior product managers. 

Challenges.


Dispatch new drivers. 

**Referrals**



- Competitor Analysis for best practices
- Right Entry Points (Referral at checkout, during a ride etc.)
- Login/Signup Mistake
- Send Free Gift Experiment

Referrals down from from 18% to 10%

Login/Signup via Account Kit
- Reduced SMS cost
- Improved funnel  (40%)



***

*If you are interested in the economics of food delivery, or on-demand services industry in general, please don't hesitate to reach out to me.* 


***

<!-- 

DECISION MAKING 


“Tell me about a time where you took a course of action your team did not agree with.”
“How did you handle the process, and what was the reaction from your team?”
“How did you react to the negativity from the team?”
“What did you learn from this situation?”
“What would you change if you could redo this task from scratch?”

* Made the team @ Jugnoo work overtime. 
* 

[^analysis]:  *“Describe the most sophisticated analysis you have conducted in your work to reach a decision”*
*“How did you know how to proceed?”*
*“What brought you to the recommendation that you made?”*
*“Was your manager pleased with your recommendation?”* 
They are looking for the processes you follow to reach a decision, to determine if you have a logical approach. They also want to see the level of technical skill you have in analysis. Tips:
- Use a project at university or an example that required you to do statistical modelling.
- Explain what made it sophisticated (was it the data source, the method of analysis, etc).
- Discuss the process involved in reaching a decision, the rationale you followed.




[^project]: *Tell me of an instance when you quickly gathered information from various sources.*  Lead complex and time-critical projects for senior leaders by quickly understanding context and developing a prioritized approach for resolution. (following structured processes & getting results). Can create sophisticated models/analysis

[^initiative]:  *“Tell me about a time you raised your hand to tackle a new assignment which you had no experience with.” “What steps did you take to approach the task?” “What were you thinking at this point?”* They are looking at your information gathering process, and ability to make effective decisions with limited data. Also judging your willingness to learn, and go above and beyond in your work. Explain why you wanted the project. Highlight the chance to learn, willingness to do more. Discuss how you got the information you needed for the task. Go into detail about how your skill in (communication/programming etc.) made it possible for this task to be a success. Confirm that you would put your hand up again. 



[^change]: *“Tell me about a time where you had to explain a new concept to a colleague.” What did you do differently that was successful in bringing them on board?”“What did your colleague say throughout the process?” “How did they react to your explanation?”*
They are looking for examples of your verbal communication ability, and skills in influencing. They want to grasp your understanding of the change process, as well as confirm you know that different people need to learn new concepts differently.
- Talk about the process you took in preparing for the conversation.
- Discuss the pivotal point in getting understanding and acceptance from your colleague.
- Reflect on why you were successful in explaining this to your colleague.
“

 -->

