---

layout: post-normal
title: The Startup with a Thousand Faces
date:   2018-04-19 09:00:11
tag: 
categories: startup_essays
excerpt: 
permalink: /quest

---



The typical [hero's journey](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hero%27s_journey) starts with an individual who is living a sheltered, particularly unremarkable life. This life is interrupted by a calling - to go on an adventure or to resolve a conflict. His first instinct is to refuse the calling. He wonders whether he is fit to adequately answer it. He fears the unknown. He feels a sense of attachment to his present life.  But then, with the nudge of a mentor, and the moral support of companions, he is able to overcome these (mostly psychological) barriers and embark on the quest. At some point he crosses a first threshold, leaving the limits of his known world and venturing into an unknown territory, eventually reaching the “belly of the whale” - the final separation from the hero's known world and self. At the belly of the whale, the hero goes through a metamorphosis. 

Every startup is in essence, a story of this quest. The Frodo of the story -  the founder, is on a quest to bring an end to a conflict by solving some customer problem. Your angel investor is your Gandalf, your core team are your Samwise, Merry and Pippin. As you gain traction and leave the Shire for the Bree, you are able to bring better players on board - your Aragorns, who help you cross that treacherous path to Rivendell. Getting to Rivendell is basically getting to product-market fit. Once you get there you get to raise your Serie A from Elrond and hire a team of experienced A players - your Gimli, Legolas and Boromir. Succeed in this hyper-growth phase and a Lady Galadriel would turn up, bestowing you with handsome gifts in the form of a round of Serie B (be careful - an ambitious, power-hungry Galadriel might threaten to take over your board, or replace you as the CEO if she searches your heart and finds darkness lurking underneath it!). From there on you can branch into separate paths and diversify your business, invest in bold new product offerings and risky experimental projects. 

At any point in this journey, your Boromirs might turn on you, your Gandalf might get busy with other endeavours, and your Gimli and Elrond - even your Merry and Pippin, might part ways.  The odds of failure are astronomically high. 

But if you are able carry the burden, and keep a single-minded focus on your mission, you might, just might, have a slim chance of succeeding. 

And it would be worth it. 

