---
layout: post-journal
title: Address a gathering
date:   2019-03-21 09:00:11
tag: The art of Oratory.
categories: guide
excerpt: 
permalink: /oratory
comments: false

---

- [Storytelling templates](https://www.sparkol.com/en/Blog/8-Classic-storytelling-techniques-for-engaging-presentations)
-[Awesome Templates](https://awesomelists.top/#repos/matteofigus/awesome-speaking)
-[The happy secret to better work](https://www.ted.com/talks/shawn_achor_the_happy_secret_to_better_work)

Public Speaking:

[Ted Video on before public speaking](https://www.ted.com/playlists/226/before_public_speaking?utm_campaign=social&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=facebook.com&utm_content=playlist&utm_term=business)
[Obama Speeches](http://www.gq-magazine.co.uk/article/president-barack-obama-best-speeches-jon-favreau-interview)
[ACM article](https://ubiquity.acm.org/article.cfm?id=3310318)

1. Anecdotes 
2. Humour 
3. Listen! 
4. Keep it simple! 
5. Empathize 
6. Know your topic well! 
7. Practice 
8. Metaphors 
9. Relaxed, Confident, Open Arms 
10. Eye Contact 


**When something wrong happens**

> “I am going to pretend that didnt happen….”

> “Ok. Go ahead.break my day….”

> “If you that thats bad, wait before i start singing….”

> “ok' name' thats the last time I've used one of your jokes.”

**How to end** 

> “You've heard the saying 'alls well that ends well. Where speeches are concerned, I believe alls well that ends, and now is my time to end.”

> “my talks usually have a happy ending. Its because everyone is happy that it ended”.

> “When a speaker says 'To make a long story short', its usually too late. I dont want you all to feel that way about me. Goodnight.

> “I dont want any applause, not that I was going to get any, but Id like everyone to stand up"

> “Now lets open for question and answers. if I KNOW THE ANSWER, i'll give it to you. else I'll just make something up. 




Structure is important! 
to be able to explain something - which you have understood - eloquently and succinctly to someone, one just needs to start with a strategic framework in the mind, and a working understanding of how information can best be organised and structured in an explanation path.
From my own experience in coaching people, information can be best organised and structured as follows, from the explanatory standpoint:
- listing or enumeration;
- topical;
- definition;
- classification
- process;
- chronological;
- compare and contrast;
- order of importance;
- sequence;
- spatial;
- cause and effect;
- problem:solution

For example, when explaining something that is a listing or enumeration, the strategic framework one holds in the head is to use a numerical sequence to explain the information. If it's a process that you are explaining, you know very well that a process always involves stages or steps, in a sequence.
That's to say, there's a start-point, an end-point, and a developmental path of transition points in between.
With such a strategic framework in the mind, your explanatory path just follows the sequence.

No response from joke? Don’t apologise, carry on, don’t bring attention to the fact

Manage Anxiety by recognising it

Use conversational language (not defensive or high status!)

See things as an opportunity, rather than as an adversarial situation!

* Wherever your company lands on this sliding scale, one thing will always remain true: *you have to be able to sell your product or service.* If you don’t sell it, no one else will. You team is relying on you to explain the benefits of the company and how it’s changing the world. It’s your job as the founder to communicate that vision. And realistically, you may not have a company for long if you can’t sell. Because it’s not just about doing interviews with journalists or sitting on panels. You have to pitch your idea to VCs if you really want a shot at building your startup into a lasting business. Personally, speaking in front of people was not one of my best traits when starting ThirdLove five years ago. But I’ve spoken at hundreds of interviews, panels, and events since then. Over time, I’ve gotten much better at it. Here’s what I learned along the way: 
    * *Practice with people you feel comfortable with.*
        It’s much easier to start practicing in front of people you know. They’ll be more forgiving when you make a mistake. And hopefully, you can solicit real feedback from them about what you need to work on. You can even do this internally at your company by giving updates or announcements to a small group of people. As you get more comfortable, increase the size of the group. If you want to practice pitching a potential investor, use your network to find another founder or an unrelated investor who’s willing to listen. The goal is to find someone who can give you candid feedback about your pitch and help you improve. For me, the most difficult part of selling my vision in the beginning was the fact that it was just a concept. I didn’t have something tangible to really help me capture that vision and communicate it the way I wanted to. But once your idea becomes a reality and you have a real product, talking about your company becomes much easier. 
    * *Focus on one point.*
        I learned this the hard way. When we launched ThirdLove in 2013, our executive team was three people: my co-founder Dave, our Chief Creative Officer, Ra’el, and me. We drove around San Francisco, meeting with different reporters to do interviews about our seed round and launch. 
        None of us had done these types of interviews before. And we quickly realized we had too many people in the room. The three of us were speaking in different styles and presenting an overwhelming amount of information. Each article reflected a different angle because we were inundating the reporters with too many talking points. 
        That experience taught me an important lesson: When announcing news to the press, you should always make it about one thing. Pick one point you want to get across and stick to that core story. It’s fine to use supporting points, but keep the focus on the idea you want to see in print. 
   
    * *Know you can’t predict everything.*
        You won’t be able to plan for everything that happens in an interview or a conference room. So that means you have to get used to dealing with the unknown. 
        If you’re asked a question you’re not prepared for, don’t scramble just to come up with a quick answer. It doesn’t matter whether you’re sitting across from a journalist or a VC—just tell them you don’t know. 
        You can say, “That’s a great question. Let me have my team pull that data and get back to you.” 
        Easy as that. Now you have time to make sure your answer is correct, as well as to reflect on how you want to answer the question later on. 
        My last piece of advice is simple: Remember, you’re the expert on this subject. 
        You started this company for a reason, and you know how you’re delivering value. Don’t lose sight of the fact that you know your business better than anyone. Keep that in mind, and you’ll have all the confidence you need stepping into the spotlight. 

[Giving talk](http://homes.cs.washington.edu/~mernst/advice/giving-talk.html)
http://www.udel.edu/chemo/teaching/CHEM465S/C465Tips.htm
[Slide Design for developers](https://zachholman.com/posts/slide-design-for-developers/)

What is vs What should be/dream/going to be - vacillate

[10 Tips for better slide decks](http://blog.ted.com/2014/07/15/10-tips-for-better-slide-decks/)

[Presentation Zen](http://www.presentationzen.com/)


What am I trying to accomplish?


1. Care!
2. Be Authoritative,Loud, Continued Annotation/Commentary
3. Include Mistakes?
4. Utterly Prepared

What is ( a sad state of affairs), What could be (A vision), What is (show how horrible the current state is) , What could be (Marvel at what all could be). End with A call to action. Use Metaphors, Imagery, Repetition. 


* When presenting, select the single most important idea and present it crystal clear, in one sentence. It should have three supporting points, because we think in triads.
* Each point should open with stories, metaphors, analogies, numbers, and statistics that your audience can relate to. Close with a clear point or a transition to the step you want the audience to take.
* Audiences remember beginnings and endings, so don't end with a Q&A. Let the audience ask questions during the presentation; this increases their participation and energy level.
* When crafting your sentences, use the word you as often as possible, create sensory-rich graphics, beware negations, and keep them short.
* Avoid irritants, or sounds or movements that do not add to your message. Every one of them is a form of communication that demands a portion of your audience's attention.
* To project power and own the stage, adopt a wide stance, practice without a podium or lectern, and find the right volume to project confidence.
* To project warmth, speak as if you were sharing a secret, and give one or two seconds of eye contact per person as you roam the stage.
* Pause frequently and deliberately. Have the confidence to make your listeners wait for your words. Also pause for three seconds after you first walk on stage, while sweeping your eyes across the audience.
* If you make a mistake, tell yourself that moguls and entertainers do this to make themselves more relatable. De-stigmatize and de-dramatize.
* Make a speech all about your audience. This takes the focus off yourself, lifts your self-consciousness, and puts you into a state of goodwill.
* 

Get Feedback
 the problem is worthwhile (it is a real problem, and a solution would be useful)
the problem it is hard (not already solved, and there are not other ways to achieve equally good results)
that you have solved it- or made progress,So be sure to provide motivation for your work, provide background about the problem, and supply sufficient technical details and experimental results.
often intuitions and an explanation of the approach are more valuable than the gory details of a proof

What's the problem? Who cares? What's your solution? 

PGP: with every subtopic, move from the Particular to the General and back to the Particular. Even though the purpose of a subtopic is to convey the general information, bracing it with particulars is a good way to draw attention and promote retention.

Dont underestimate intelligence.
What will people feel as a result of hearing my presentation?
Tell the purpose and plan, what I expect of them to do during and after
Additional support materials


Must know of the structure from the start - they cannot go back and forth like the reader of a text

1. Identitfy your system
2. The features that differentiate from other systems

Relevant to a listener's interest and needs
Build around your listener's interests

State your theme and message at the beginning

As you will know from the subject ...... insert additional material for the purpose of others who might be present.


------


How to Give a Good Conference Talk

By Deane Barker on April 17, 2014


I talk at a fair amount of conferences. Over the years, I’ve taken notes on how to do it well (this pre-supposes that I do it well, which is very much up for debate).  I figured I’d share these notes.
Now, understand that I give a very specific type of conference presentation, which is 30-50 minutes and always based around a presentation deck (a Power Point).  This might not fit for everyone.  Some of you might be doing a short speech unsupported by any visuals. If so, pick and choose from the sections below.
Also, I don’t offer this list as hard-and-fast rules, nor do I think it’s the only way to do it. This is simply what works for me. I concede that other people may have entirely different ways of doing it.
Here are my notes, edited slightly to make for a better blog post. If you’re staring down a conference presentation, I hope they help you.  (And, in the true spirit of PowerPoint, these are in the form of bullet points, because that’s how I wrote them down originally.)
Questions to Ask the Organizers

The answers to these questions will help you, either explicitly or implicitly. The idea here is that it’s good to get as much background info as you can, because whether you’re aware of it or not, it will influence your talk as you put it together.
* How long do you have to speak?
* Do they expect a Q & A period?
* Where is the venue? What is its layout?  A theater?  A classroom?  A conference room? (If you can visit the venue beforehand, or see pictures of it, do that. It really helps to be able to visualize the room when you’re rehearsing. Things that might work in one type of room will fail completely in another.)
* Can you have a deck?
* How many people are in attendance?
* What events are before and after your talk?  Another talk?  Which one?  Food?  Going home?
* What is the audience members’ relationship to the topic?  How knowledgeable are they?  Are they seasoned conference attendees, or is this rare for them?
* Have they paid money to be there?
* What is their expectation of learning?  What do they hope to come away with?
* How is your talk being advertised or promoted?  What is the organizer promising – implicitly or explicitly – to attendees?
* What is the tone of the talk?
    * Tutorial: insert tab X into slot Y
    * Informational: this is information about topic X you might not know
    * Conceptual: this is a new way of looking at or thinking about X
    * Narrative/case study: this is something we did in situation X
* What is the scope of what you want them to learn?  Are you trying to teach them something incremental, or something revolutionary?  Do you want then to nod their heads and say “that’s some useful information I can use,” or are you shooting for “wow, that was mind-blowing!”  The latter is riskier – it’s awesome when it works, a disaster when it doesn’t.
* What is the point of your deck?  Is it the focus of your talk — screencaps or something you will be talking about directly, or is it decoration and mood-setting?
* What are the technical parameters?  Will you be able to use your own laptop?  How big is the screen?  Will you have a monitor where you can see your deck as you’re giving it? Will you have a remote mouse (hint: bring your own).
Planning Your Talk

* Start early. I know you don’t want to – it’s so much easier to avoid doing it because it can be scary and actually doing it brings you face-to-face with that fear. But the fear isn’t going to go away, it’s just going to get worse with time, so face up to it early.
* Give yourself enough prep time. The rule of thumb is that you need one hour of prep for every minute of presentation time.  So a 50-minute talk will take over a full-time week of work to put together. This, of course, varies greatly, and you may have a full-fleshed out talk in your head, ready-to-go.  But, in general, understand that it’s going to take more time than you think it will.
* Write down, in a couple bullet points, the things you want the audience members to come away with. In a perfect world, this is what they learned – this is the future state you want them to get to. These points will guide you while putting together the entire thing. You can “test” your talk against these points.
* Write down the major talking points to support those learning points and put them in order – “to tell this story, I need to talk about X, then Y, then Z.” This divides your talk up into sections, which is important. Talks need to progress like a story – there needs to be a build-up, a center section, then a conclusion. A movie separates these with “plot points.”  You don’t have plot points; you have section transitions.
* Incrementally embellish each section. Treat it as a mini-talk by itself – “to tell this story (section), I need to talk about X, then Y, then Z.”
* Don’t edit too much when putting this together.  Go nuts. Pretend you have all the time in the world and make it as long as you want.  Rehearsal is when you start cutting the thing down, and it’s better to start with too much information than too little.
* Don’t be surprised if the content of your talk changes considerably through this process.  Not only the specifics, but the entire nature and message. This sounds weird, but as you say things out loud and create slides to illustrate it, this has a way of catalyzing things in your own head. You don’t truly understand something until you have to explain it, and the process of explaining it will often make you think differently about it. (See “Rubber Duck Debugging.”)  There have been several times when I was mid-way through rehearsals and suddenly realized, “I’ve been thinking about this all wrong…” or “My main point is not that important after all. Rather, this smaller point is really want I should be teaching them…” If this happens, don’t be scared – it’s a gift.

Preparing Your Deck

* Transfer your outline to PowerPoint, or whatever.  Most all of my talks are very presentation-based, which I realize isn’t true for everyone.  But when I’m prepping a deck, I put my outline in Power Point, then start developing there.
* For goodness sakes, understand how the software works.  If you’re using PowerPoint, get a book and do some remedial PowerPoint training.  This is stressful enough — don’t make it worse by not understanding what you’re doing.
* A practical note: put the file in Dropbox immediately.  You don’t want to lose it, and if someone goes wrong, you can retrieve it from Dropbox from any computer. There are several times when I’ve had to download a deck from Dropbox onto the presentation computer at the last minute. (Once, in Lisbon, I actually made a change 15 seconds before I went on, hoping that it replicated fast enough to beat me to the podium. It did.)
* Do your title slide and your transitional slides right away, so you have a framework of the talk to work with. You have your sections set now, so you can concentrate on supporting them individually and telling the story around the transitions between sections.  Also do the last slide — it should always be your contact information. So you should have the beginning, section headings, and final slide done first, which gives you a framework to embellish.
* Don’t worry about design too much.  If your slides need a theme, and if you know how to work your presentation software, you can apply it towards the end. (The current trend is away from design – the plainer the better these days, it seems.)
* Do not pay attention to any guidelines about how long to talk over a slide. I’ve spent five minutes talking about a slide. I’ve also spent five seconds. I’ll often have a sequence of five slides that I rip through in 15 seconds. It’s not important – your talk matters more than the slides. They are there to support what you’re saying.
Rehearsing Your Talk

* Rehearse out loud, by yourself, to an empty room.  Yes, you’ll feel stupid.  Tough — better to feel stupid by yourself than in front of a group.
* Rehearse the entire talk at least 10 times. Yes, that is a lot.
* Get a remote clicker.  Walk around.  Gesture.  If your dog doesn’t look at you funny at least once every rehearsal, you’re not moving enough.
* Rehearsals have two different flavors:
    * Exploratory: this is a loose run through, when you stop and adjust slides, change things, etc.  You can stop in the middle and edit.
    * For Time: keep going through, no matter what.  This is how you’re going to determine if you’re within the time boundaries.
* Don’t always rehearse from the beginning.  The goal is to be able to pick up at at any point in the talk and carry through to the finish.  So, in addition to doing the entire thing, start ¼ of the way through, ½ of the way through, right at the end, pick a random slide and start from there, etc.  If you start from the beginning all the time, then the beginning gets a lot of focus, and the latter part of the talk doesn’t get your full rehearsal attention.
* Try to get Presenter View (a PowerPoint thing; Keynote probably has something similar) — you should be able to see the upcoming slide on a separate monitor at all times, with your notes if possible.  If not, print the presentation notes out before hand. (Though, honestly, if you have to refer to your notes at all, you probably didn’t rehearse enough.)
* If a slide doesn’t feel right, it probably isn’t.  If you’re tripping over a slide, and it just doesn’t sound right, get rid of it — either drop it, or combine it with something else.  So long as you have enough time before you have to talk, don’t be afraid to do major surgery.  Slides that sound wrong, probably are wrong.
* If you’re using notes, don’t write them as if you’re going to read them verbatim.  Write bullet points that will just jar your memory of the points you need to cover.
* Concentrate on your last section. This is the payoff, and too many times, people rehearse solely from the beginning so by the last section, they’re just trying to get done. Rehearse the last section by itself multiple times.
Giving The Actual Talk

* Show up early, and make sure AV is fine.  Get your presentation up on the screen before anyone shows up, and run through it quickly to make sure it looks right.  You do not want surprises (“Where is my custom font?!?!”) right before you talk.
* Have a remote clicker.  Always.  Podiums suck.
* The goal is to have the talk feel conversational, not formal.  Meet as many people as you can before the talk.  As the room fills up, go introduce yourself and talk to people.  Your goal is to make them feel that they’re in this talk with you, not that you’re giving it and they’re receiving it (even though that’s exactly what’s happening).
* If you can, start with some comment about the event or something that just occurred: “I was just talking to Mark in the hall…” This sets people at ease and takes you immediately off-script, so it sets expectations on the conversational tone of what follows.
* Don’t read from the presentation.  This sucks for a lot of reasons, but mainly because you’re setting yourself up to be super-rehearsed, and if you have to ad lib, it becomes totally obvious that you’re off-script.  You should sound off-script all the time.
* Be explicit about the section transitions.  “Okay, so I’ve just explained what X was, now I’m going to talk about why X is important.”  The audience wants this – they want to know that they’re moving steadily through the talk. They want to mentally organize the content: “What did I learn in that last section? I need to store that away, because this is a new section with a new thing to learn.”
* Try not to be nervous.  I know this sounds like a ridiculous platitude, but here’s why it’s important: if you’re nervous, the audience will be nervous too. They’ll be scared for you, and they’ll subconsciously resent you for it.  If you’re relaxed and having a good time, the audience will be too.  Remember this: they want to like you. They do not want to see you fail. If you make them feel awkward, it’s harder for them to like you.
* If you think of an anecdote, tell it. Remember, you’re not on a strict script here. Feel free to weave in and out of your rehearsed outline. I don’t think I’ve gotten through a single talk where I didn’t extemporaneously say something that I never rehearsed.
* Gesture at the screen.  Point at stuff, if appropriate.  Look at the screen yourself.  You want the audience to feel like this is something you’re looking at together, not that it’s just background information.
* Last slide is contact information.  Invite people to contact you with questions, or if they want to talk about anything you presented. It has practical value, and it’s a nice, clear way to signal that the talk is done. The audience wants to know when to clap, and they’ll feel comfortable with an explicit cue.
If you want some more good tips, take a look at this: 11 Top Tips for a Successful Technical Presentation. In particular, read the comments there – lots of great stuff submitted in the comments. It’s also worth noting that Scott Hanselman is the presenting style that I really try to emulate: he’s so wonderfully relaxed when he talks that you feel like you’re in it with him, rather than being lectured to.
If I could replicate one talk (in vibe and style, not so much content), it would be this one: It’s not what you read, it’s what you ignore. That’s Scott at WebStock 2012 in New Zealand. It’s fantastic.
It helps that Scott has spoken at my company, sitting at my breakroom table. It’s easy to like someone when they do that for you.



- See more at: http://gadgetopia.com/#sthash.D8tuzFNB.dpuf


**How can you best communicate complex ideas simply?**


> If you can't explain it simply, you don't understand it well enough.


(a) Work really hard to first ensure that I myself understand the complex idea well enough to be able to discern its most critical components from just the necessary but minor details.

(b) Think about what your desired outcome is: Is it to help someone just understand something, or go beyond that and take an action, or something else?

Start with the Simplest Explanation
Think about the KISS principle that has been used for decades or Occam’s razor that has been philosophized for centuries. Simplicity works. Start with something that can be covered, ideally, in a couple of sentences or within a minute or 2. If there is a critically important technical detail, mention it quickly. IF the audience wants more detail, they can, and will, ask.


We'll start with six basic principles, then move to an applied example.

- Give context. Always begin with a roadmap, moving from the satellite view down to the street-level. People need to understand where the details fit in the larger picture.
- Tell a story. Narratives both stick and engage better than facts. They also allow you to ground the abstract in "real-life" application.
- One analogy is worth five explanations. Our brains shut down easily when learning about unfamiliar concepts. Whenever possible, create a strong bridge between what your audience knows and what you're hoping to teach them.
Come up with the simplest possible analogy in a domain the audience is familiar with to convey the idea.  

    Example: WSJ article. The first paragraph summarizes the complex idea and the second one delivers to easy-to-understand analogy. 

    > Software Firms Scramble to Jump Into Containers

    > "What makes containers so compelling? The technology encloses a program (or a piece of one) in a layer of software that connects seamlessly to the operating system and other computing resources it depends on to run. Putting a program in a container has a number of benefits, but a crucial advantage is that it can be moved quickly and easily from one computer to another—say, from a programmer’s laptop to a test system to the cloud. Given the pace of Internet time, harried chief technology officers are desperate for anything that speeds up the process."

    > “Think about a cake,” said Scott Johnston, senior vice president of product at Docker, likening the cake part to a server and the icing to a program. “You want to be able to change frosting from chocolate to vanilla. If there’s paper between the two, you can lift up the frosting and replace it.”

    Example: 

    > “Well, we had 2 VARCHAR, fields from the M2S legacy system that were being concatenated before the websphere interface batch job … bla bla bla … The SAP iDocs were correctly configured, so, bla bla bla… Eventually we noticed that the fields were being truncated … bla bla bla… so finally, we were able to fix it by …womp womp womp…  yeah, so now it works.”

    > Director (to me): “Can you explain that in English, please?”    

    > Me: “The errors were caused by a misalignment between the old system and SAP. We figured out the problem, aligned the fields and everything is working as expected now.”   

    > Director: “That was easy.”   

    Example:  When someone is pitching an innovative new idea

    > “It’s like Facebook, but for dogs.”    
    >  “It’s like Spotify but for independent artists.”
- Use sound-bites. Your outline should hang on a limited number of "hinges". (For presentations and lectures, you should come up with a clear, visual, memorable line to describe each of them.)
- Anticipate "drop-points".  Are you using terms or concepts that contain potential ambiguity? Are you predicating your argument on an assumption that might not be shared? Are you skipping steps? Don't.
- Over-narrate the journey. The best advice I've ever received on public speaking was to "tell people where they're going, tell them where they are, and tell them where they've been". At each check-point, do a brief recap the help them re-orient.


Ok, now a practical example. Let's say your mission was to explain search engine optimization to a crowd of non-technical business owners. 

A good approach might be:

1. Our goal today is to give each of you a practical understanding of what SEO is, what SEO isn't, and what you should and shouldn't do when you leave here.

2. The purpose of good SEO is to make sure that search engines promote your website or content when searchers demonstrate a specifically relevant interest.

3. The purpose of good SEO is NOT to make sure your website ranks well for a large dictionary of generic or vaguely-relevant keywords.

4. Here's our roadmap. We're going to discuss four points this morning: (a) Google's perspective; (b) the searcher's perspective; (c) tactics to avoid; and (d) tactics to use.

5. Our first topic is Google's perspective. Understanding this is the key to understanding everything else. I'm going to give you a soundbite that I want you to remember: "Searchers are Google's customers first." 

    * Did you know that Google hires rocket-scientists away from groups like NASA? You're probably wondering why. Two reasons. First, they want to deliver the highest quality search results. Second, they want to outsmart con-men.
     
    *  In the first case, delivering the best results means more folks using Google.This results in more ad revenue for them. If I search for a local plumber and end up on a spammy site owned by a shady company, that influences my trust in Google. In the long run, this means decreased ad revenue. 

    * In the second case, most website owners covet top rankings, yet few are willing to make the long investment to get there. Historically, this led many to hire so-called "SEO experts" to produce results for them. Instead of playing by the spirit of the rules, most of them focused on exploiting weakness in Google's search algorithms. This led to decreased search quality, which angered Almighty Google greatly.

    *5.4* So, to recap, Google hires rocket scientists because high-quality search results mean increased revenues for them. They're happy if it means revenues for you, too, but searchers are their customers first. They're willing to protect them vigorously, at great expense.

6.  Ok, so now that we understand Google's perspective, let's see it from the perspective of the searcher. Our soundbite for this point is: "If I ask for a burger, don't give me a menu; if I ask for a recommendation, don't lead me wrong."

    6a. Let's use a thought experiment. Say you're hungry, in a rush, and you know exactly what you want: a bacon cheeseburger. You go to a food court to feed that appetite. When you arrive, you find ten vendors, all of which advertise their "delicious food". You go to the first one, browse the menu, but don't see a burger on it. You go to the second, third, fourth one -- same thing. You go to the fifth one, and this time the person behind the counter actually acknowledges your presence.

    The dialogue goes something like this:

    > "Are you hungry?     
    > "YES!"     
    > "Would you like something to eat?"     
    > "YESS!"     
    > "Do you know exactly what you want?"     
    > "YESSSSSSSSS!!!!!!"     
    > "Cool. Here's a menu."     

    *grown man exits, sobbing; vows to never return*

    Now let's repeat that same scenario, imagining that the food court provided a host who greeted visitors on their way in. 

    > "You're here because you're hungry. What are you in the mood for?"    
    > "The best bacon cheeseburger here."    
    > "No problem. Here's the top three options, ranked in order of known quality. Bon appetite."

    Which experience is better?

    6b. Let's now do a second thought experiment, this time imagining that you were hungry, but had an unidentifiable craving. How would you hope the conversation to go?
    
    "You're here because you're hungry. What are you in the mood for?"
    "Umm. Mexican food + no gluten + take out."
    "No problem. We have a range of quality options I think should fit. Let me  tell you the top recommendations, using just one or two sentences to describe each."

    Sounds ideal, right? 

    This is basically all that Google is trying to do: determine the problem you're trying to solve, then match you with the highest-quality solution for that specific problem. 

    6c. So, to recap, searchers are Google's customers first, and Google keeps them happy by determining and fulfilling their needs. The customer doesn't care about them or you -- they just want a burger or a recommendation; either a specific thing or a specific direction.

7. Alright, now we're getting to the meat of it: the tactics you shouldn't use. Our soundbite here is: "Never offer a cheeseburger to a vegan." 

    7a. As we discussed earlier, some people have tried to "trick" Google into ranking their sites and content higher than deserved. Without getting too technical, how did they do that?

    One of the more popular methods was called "keyword cramming". Think of it like one of those food-court restaurants having a forest of banner-stands in front of their counter, packed with large-text phrases like "best burger", "best burger foodcourt", "best burger ever", "foodcourt burger", "burger, burger", etc.

    Their theory is that by being incredibly, overbearingly aggressive in declaring what they offer, you'll pick them first.

    Unfortunately, they're overlooking three key things: (i) some people want a recommendation, not a specific food item; (ii) those that want a burger would prefer to see a qualified statement like "#1 rated burger 2015; local choice" to something unqualified and generic like "best burger ever"; and (iii) some people don't want meat burgers.

    Ultimately, "bad" tactics are any that fail to integrate specific solutions on all those points. If the pitch an SEO firm gives you doesn't include contextualized approaches on all three fronts, run.

    7b.  When people keyword-cram (or use similarly lazy and/or devious tactics), they risk being penalized by Google. This can be incredibly costly, often resulting in the equivalent of a black-list. In those cases, you'll be worse off than if you never did any SEO at all.

    7c.  So, to recap, searchers belong to Google, whose sole interest is identifying what they want and giving it to them -- as specifically as possible. Trying to game the system with generic content and gimmicky strategies will result in them putting incredible distance between you and their customers.

8. So, now we arrive at what you've all come for today -- the good stuff: the tactics you should use. Our context here is simple: "To catch a customer, think like a customer."

    a. This is simple concept that's difficult to execute. Most owners think they understand their customers, while in reality they really just understand their industry. Sadly, the two things are not the same. 

    It's important to note that I don't mean we should try to divine the inner being of our customers in some philosophical way. This is about basic psychology. Nothing more.

    Before a customer makes a search, they formulate a question. Before they formulate that question, they fall prey to a desire. 

    The desire can be for many things -- prestige, peace-of-mind, pleasure, etc. -- and you'll consistently fail to sell anything to them until you figure out what it is.

    Think back to the food court scenario. Before someone walks into one, they have to decide they want food. This is rarely an analytic decision. It begins with a feeling. The decision tree roots itself in a primal desire.

    That said, not every form of hunger is equal. Some just want to feel full. Some want specific nourishment. Some want to scratch a specific itch. 

    Until you identify that -- until you identify your primary customers and the desire-to-action process that they undergo, how can you possibly know what signs to post and what greetings to offer? 

    More meaningfully, if you can't answer those questions today, what did you tell your SEO team to optimize for yesterday?

    In most cases, companies with limited budgets pay money they can't afford and all they get for it is a collection of "best burger" banner-stands.

    8b. We have just one practical consideration left. Once we've identified exactly what our customers want, and once we've reverse-engineered how they break down the translation of desire into action, what do we do in response?

    The heart of real SEO is building solid content around those specific desire-paths, creating posts and pages and videos that speak to each of them individually. (Well, not all -- focusing on just the top 5 scenarios is usually enough.)

    Learning how to format and promote that content is where you'll need the help of a quality SEO firm. If worth their salt, they'll know the best practices to appease Google. Just remember that their expertise is taking what you give them and optimizing it, not figuring out what you should give them in the first place.

    (Yes, some firms can walk you through that, too. But it's pretty rare that it makes sense for you to pay them for that. These are questions you should already be asking yourself. You should be the expert on your own business.)

    8c. So, there we have it. You now know the basics of what every business owner needs to understand about SEO. 

To ensure it sticks, let's recap it one final time.

* Searchers are Google's customers.
* Customers have specific desires.
* Good SEO never involves generalizations or spam.
* Good SEO is about identifying root desires and meeting them with specific and relevant content, well-optimized to industry best practices.
With that framework in mind, you're now prepared to make informed decisions about what sort of consultants are worth hiring, which are worth avoiding, and what sort of answers you need to come up with internally before hiring anyone can be worth your while.


-----


