---
layout: post-journal
title: Stylise
date:   2019-01-23 09:00:11
tag: The Way With Words
categories: guide
excerpt: 
permalink: /style

---

> Plunge into the sea of language and splash around in it. Almost all humor (except situational and physical humor) is rooted in language: jokes, puns, anecdotes, observations, funny stories... So make English (or whatever your native language is) your home and visit every room. Read constantly, write constantly, care about each word you write, try writing poetry, and so on.  The good news is that humor works in any vernacular. Jerry Seinfeld and Chris Rock speak differently, but both love words. So your goal shouldn't be to speak like someone else. It should be to plum the depth of your own style of speaking -- to expand your vocabulary and expressiveness in ways that fit your personality.   It may seem as if this has nothing to do with being funny, but the more you play with words -- the more expert and relaxed you become with them, the more you flirt with them, fight with them, mangle them, and coin them -- the more avenues you'll create for humor to slip out. 


----


* True, spontaneous wit results from using language to defend an attitude  which runs counter to what is expected, or which is hard to defend. It is a kin to a creative solution, showing a third way when there seem to be none, and the joy comes from the discovery and the reveal. 


    > “As a VC there are certain things you’re not allowed to say. Being the Best College is one of them. But I can say that this is the warmest reception I have received” -  Louise Richardson, newly appointed Oxford VC, on her first to HMC  

    > You can have a sense of humor. You can know that it’s not personal. And you can just find creative ways to solve the problem." - Oriet Gadish

    > Well, you see, women are considered bad luck in our industry,” and everybody froze, the CEO and all the people in our group from Bain and Company. I just turned around and said, “Well, in that case, I think that you should make sure that I go to every single one of your competitors.”  
    
    Here one is trying to be polite, yet at the same time maintaining the view that he doesn’t think much of the man: 
    > "A modest man, who has much to be modest about.”
    
    Here too, Diana implies she is not happy, without saying anything negative about the other people involved. 
    > "Well, there were three of us in this marriage, so it was a bit crowded" - [Diana](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ocw_OXfZckU)  

* Often the the reveal comes from looking at things from a different, or wider perspective, or more holistic perspective. One can connect different perspectives to compose forms such as irony. 

>  “It is a sobering thought that we still have to be given a sermon on humility”- Louise Richardson, after a sermon in our college


* Timing and delivery (when and how) is the key. Sometimes remaining cool, confident, calm and smiling does more damage than saying something.     

* Reincorporate from past conversations or details remembered
    > “Oh who told you that, your ____?"

    > Last I checked...

* Accept and exaggerate: If someone criticizes you, embrace the criticism and exaggerate it. 
    > If someone calls you immature, say “that’s what my kindergarten teacher says.”
    
    > If someone calls you fat, say “ten more pounds and I’m ready for the Santa suit.”
    
    > And if you don’t think you can come up with one-liners on the fly, you can simply give a knowing look, and say, “you don’t know the half of it” or “yeah, it’s worse than you think.”

* Convey Indifference: 
    > What I am telling you is that I am not thinking about (Obama on Sarah Palin)
    > Frankly, me dear, I don’t give a damn
    > Know what's funny? You know who I am and I have no idea who you are.
    > Other options: Smirk, Raise Eyebrows, Dismiss, Roll Eyes, Yawn.

* Take the words literally
    > “I wasn’t trying to be difficult…”
    
    > “I did not want to shag his friend” (JP to Thierry)


* Yes, and mirror. Mirror the rhythm or structure of the sentence to convey your own point.   Use ambiguity and rhythm.  Use puns and doube meaning.
    >  Talking you yourself again, Kenny? Harharharhar(stupid laughing). Better than talking to you, Mark,"
 
* Hit Back
    > You don’t have the best of track records in that department….
   
    > Don’t be thowing stones when you live in a glass house!
   
    > Are you projecting your own….?
   
    > Says the person who.. [Woah Woah Woah….A person from Pakistan, of all people…]
   
    > Takes one to know one
   
    > Voice of experience speaking
   
    > You and I have so much in common

* Accept and use ambiguity change context. 
    > TWSS
    
    > If “Plan A” didn’t work. Don’t worry; the alphabet has 25 more letters
    
    > Dear MATH, stop asking to find your X, she’s not coming back.


* Think of an idiom appropriate to the context but convey it indirectly
    > Hey, I found your Nose; it was in my business again.   
    
    > Behind every great man is a woman rolling her eyes.   
    
    > Think twice before you speak, you’d be able to say something more Insulting.

* Draw on Opinion vs Fact distinction
    > My opinions may have changed, but not the fact that I am right.   
    
    > Thats, just, uh, your opinion man. I don’t remember asking for your opinion.

*  Draw a somewhat non-standard analogy, and then reveal analogous qualities in a surprising way.
    > Procrastination is like masturbation, it's all good and fun until you realize you are only fucking yourself!
      
    > I like my salad how i like my women. Without any dressing.

* Irritate by Patronising
    > ”Do you need a hug?”
    
    > “Don’t let your emotions get the better of you”  
    
    > “You seem stressed”
    
    > “Is there anything that I can do for you?"
    
    > “That’s why you love me”

* Cliched, gender-specific comebacks
   > To Women: I am good in bed/ I am turned on
   > To Men: Small Penis/Your Mom
* Mock 
  > Repeat in a funny voice

* Appeal to realism (even if its not real)
    > C’mon lets be honest here
    
    > Lets be real
    
    > Who are we kidding?
    
* Elevate your Status or Lowers others
    > Thank you, for proving my point.   
    
    > I wouldn’t expect any less   
    
    > I refuse to have a battle of wits with someone unarmed    
    
    > You flatter yourself...   
    > 
    > High school trope (What are we, still in high school?
    
    > GO and show strength or power (ACTION COMEBACKS e.g. go and touch them while making eye contact all the time, or take something of theirs) OR Threaten (SAY THAT AGAIN?  I WOULD CUT YOUR DICK OFF/ I would break your legs) 

* Sarcasm (revealing by saying the opposite of what is true)
    > ‘Its ok man. It’s your college, so you can say it” (when it isn't)  
    
    > What a beautiful gesture!      
    > [I'm so sorry my sarcasm is making me more creative](https://bigthink.com/ideafeed/im-so-sorry-my-sarcasm-is-making-me-more-creative)

* Damn them with faint praise
    > A woman was asked whether she liked this other person. She paused for a second and said "...I think she's very beautiful."
   
    > If it's an online interaction, you can praise them, say, for not overusing apostrophes or for understanding where commas go. Come to think of it, even if you work with this person in so-called "real life" you can praise their apostrophe use or the clever way they use capital letters correctly..or what have you, as they say.
      
    > If they are, perhaps, trying to make themselves "useful" to you, you can always say brightly - "Oh I so appreciate that you are willing to help me. I will be sure to get in touch when that's necessary."
   
    > Or a lovely conversation ender which I've seen many an English person use to brilliant effect:  "Ah, but don't let me keep you." (even when the annoying person clearly still wanted to continue the discussion.)   
   
    > "I could see you really getting good at what you're doing someday" 
    
    > These shoes look comfortable, don
   


* Show the courage of being Real
    > You know what, now that I'm telling it, it's not as funny as it sounded in my head.
    
    > All right, all right. That joke's better than you acted. Perhaps it's not. Maybe it's dumb. It could be. I hear you, man. I'm not a fuckin', genius, for Christ's sake, you know? I'm just tryin' to tell some jokes. Shit, who the fuck are you? That track is number 14. It's called "Attitude."


* Draw from immediate context to snub
    > “I hate technology” [in an elevator] “ Then why don’t you take the stairs"






----

Movie Scenes:



- [Reality Bites](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LdsaucLvRb4)
- [Kate and Leopold](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LdsaucLvRb4)

----


> “This [Liverpool team] reminds me of the Arsenal's invicibles"  
> “Except they aren’t invincibles"


> “When it comes to numbers, India wins at most things!"   
> “Like Rapists"

>  "It is England but India has more support in the stadium, and the pitch is completely assisting your spinners. Says a lot about our hospitality, right...""       
>  "Well... we let you rule our nation for so many years. I believe that's the least you can do for us" (courtesy Harsha Bhogle:)

> Where did you get your Boobs from? "Assume Its at the corner of x (“Stop talking to me”)  and y (“You can’t afford them”…)" - Amy Schumer to a heckler

----



- Satire. 
- Relate and then violate expectations
    - Take people to a point we can all emotionally relate to. And then, BAM!, they blow it to smithereens. Once you can relate to them, they're along for the ride.
- Reincorporation: Look back instead of just forward: look for things you’ve shelved and reincorporate them.
> "The improviser has to be like a man walking backwards. He sees where he has been, but he pays no attention to the future. His story can take him everywhere, but he still has to balance it and give it shape, by remembering incidents that have been shelved and reincorporating them."

- Dialogues
> Curse your sudden but inevitable betrayal!

- Allusions.
    -  Have ideas and themes and thing bring the out with concrete examples.
    > X will open Pandora's box

- (joke) doing the opposite of what asked






---

**Well Known Idioms**

-----

**Snowclones**

[List of Snowclones](http://snowclones.org/the-queue/)

 > “Thanks for holding the fort. All quiet on the western front?”      
 > “This agression will not stand, man”   
 > Curse your sudden but inevitable betrayal   
 > "10 Points!” (instead of Yes)   
 > Death by X   
 > “Great Minds…. think alike”   
 > Don’t count your chickens before they hatch   
 > Everything you heard is true"   
 > Regress   
 >> Who will watch the watchman?   
 >   
 > Draw on the distinction between Idea and Execution. An idea might be right, even if the execution is flawed 
 >> Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists
 >>  Rationalism from rationalism   
 >> Liberalism from liberals    
 >> Saving Xism from the Xists

> You can have your X and Y it too. ("You" "can't" "have" "your" "use" "and" "mention" "it" "too." --Douglas Hofstadter)
> Nothing says X like Y         
> I got 99 problems but X aint one        
> Whose Xing the X?        
> Consider the X        
> X considered harmful (The use of smileys, !!!, considered harmful)    
> He may be a X, but he's our X     


-----

**Repetition Based Rhetoric**


- Repetition of a word or phrase for emphasis (*Epizeuxis*)
    > The first rule of Fight Club is: you do not talk about Fight Club. The second rule of Fight Club is: you do not talk about Fight Club.
    - https://lifehacker.com/5715912/how-to-plant-ideas-in-someones-mind
- Start of neighbouring clauses (*Anaphora* or “carrying back"). Politicians love this 
    > Some people have the temerity to say we didn’t deserve that.      
    > For the kid, whose first experience of watching a World Cup was that handballing, cheating little git robbing us of a semi final…      
    > For the kid, whose second World Cup was watching England play the best we’ve done in decades at a World Cup only to have it ripped away in a penalty shoot out…      
    > For the kid, who didn’t even get to cheer England on in the States because we didn’t qualify…    
    [Referencce](https://www.football365.com/news/this-england-team-turning-pessimists-into-believers)


> “You and I, as citizens, have the power to set this country’s course. You and I, as citizens, have the        obligation to shape the debates of our time -- not only with the votes we cast, but with the voices we lift in defense of our most ancient values and enduring ideals. “ - Obama, Inaugural Speech, 2013  

> “We shall not flag or fail. We shall go on to the end. We shall fight in France, we shall fight on the seas and oceans, we shall fight with growing confidence and growing strength in the air, we shalldefend our island, whatever the cost may be, we shall fight on the beaches, we shall fight on the landing grounds, we shall fight in the fields and in the streets, we shall fight in the hills. We shall never surrender.” - Winston Churchill  
   
- End of sentence (*Epistrophe*) 
    > Wherever there's a fight so hungry people can eat, I'll be there.    
    > Wherever there's a cop beating up a guy, I'll be there.   
    > And when our folk eat the stuff they raise and live in the houses they build – why, I'll be there  

- Both start and end (*Symploce*)
    > "Together, we will make America strong again. We will make America wealthy again. We will make America proud again. We will make America safe again. And yes, together we will make America great again." — Donald Trump

- Repetition of the initial part of a clause or sentence at the end of that same clause or sentence (*Epanalepsis*)
    The beginning and the end of a sentence are two positions of emphasis, so special attention is placed on the phrase by repeating it in both places. Nested double-epanalepses are antimetaboles

    > The king is dead; long live the king.    
    > Wise men speak because they have something to say; Fools because they have to say something

* Last word of preceding clause (*Anadiplosis*). conjures an illusion of logical continuity.

    > We glory in tribulations also, knowing that tribulation worketh patience, and patience, experience, and experience, hope, and hope maketh man not ashamed — Paul the Apostle, Epistle to the Romans
    > "Fear leads to anger. Anger leads to hate. Hate leads to suffering." — Yoda, Star Wars.

    > "What I present here is what I remember of the letter, and what I remember of the letter I remember verbatim (including that awful French)." —Vladimir Nabokov, Lolita
    > “The general who became a slave. The slave who became a gladiator. The gladiator who defied an emperor. Striking story! “ - Gladiator (the movie)
    > “If the soup was as warm as the wine, if the wine was as old as the turkey, if the turkey had breasts like the maid, it would have been a fine dinner.”  - Anonymous (also an example of a periodic sentence.)

* Close repetition separated by a word or phrase (*Diacope*)
> "Bond, James Bond"    
> “O Captain! My Captain!”

* repetition of words in successive clauses in transposed order (*Chiasmus and  antimetabole*)
    
    The main difference between the two is that antimetabole will reverse the exact words in the sentence, while chiasmus will reverse grammatical structure, not necessarily with the same words. 

> "Eat to live, not live to eat."

**Repeart the word in a different form** (*Polyptoton*)
>  "The Greeks are strong, and skillful to their strength, Fierce to their skill, and to their fierceness valiant;" William Shakespeare, Troilus and Cressida

>  "Preach ye not, they preach." Micah                  

>  "With eager feeding food doth choke the feeder." William Shakespeare, Richard II                      

>  "Not as a call to battle, though embattled we are." John F. Kennedy                  
>  "Thou art of blood, joy not to make things bleed." Sir Philip Sidney

>  "Absolute power corrupts absolutely."   

>  "Who shall watch the watchmen themselves (Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?)                    
>  "Diamond me no diamonds, prize me no prizes..." Alfred, Lord Tennyson   

> "Judge not, that ye be not judged" -  Matthew 7:1
                 
>  "It is the same with all the powerful of to-day; it is the same, for instance, with the high-placed and high-paid official. Not only is the judge not judicial, but the arbiter is not even arbitrary." 
— G.K. Chesterton                       
    
                 

--------

**Word Based**


* Hyperbaton. Change word order to emphasize latter part. 
> The right is ours. Have it, we must. Use it, we will. 


* Archaic

> It is an ancient Mariner,. And he stoppeth one of three. 'By thy long grey beard and glittering eye,. Now wherefore stopp'st thou me?


-----


* Alliteration
> "I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character." - Martin Luther King, Jr
> "And the silken sad uncertain rustling of each purple curtain" - Edgar Allan Poe
- [A completely alliterative essay](
http://www.essayforum.com/undergraduate-essays-2/art-architecture-uc-prompt-world-10626/)

---

**Idea/Concept Based Rhetoric**

* Irony
    > As clear as mud

* Sarcasm: 
    - Saying the opposite of what is clearly evident.  
    - Taboo Topics: Death, Sex and STDs. 
    - Watch every episode of Blackadder and remember Captain Black Adder's every response to Baldrick's 'cunning plans.

* Antithesis: 

    bringing out of a contrast in the ideas by an obvious contrast in the words, clauses, or sentences, within a parallel grammatical structure. Oscar Wilde is known to have extensively used antithesis:

    > “The well bred contradict other people. The wise contradict themselves.” - Oscar Wilde
    > “Fashion is what one wears oneself. What is unfashionable is what other people wear.” - Oscar Wilde
    > “Immature poets imitate; mature poets steal” -Eliot

    Although seemingly ingenious, Wildean antitheses are, in fact, quite formulaic:
    - Make a statement that is relatively obvious (ex. The well bred contradict other people 
    -  Begin the second half in a rather obvious manner. (The wise.. )
    -  Take an odd turn. (... contradict themselves. )

    > You don't make peace with friends. You make it with unsavory enemies (Yitzhak Rabin quote used thrice in Game of Thrones)
    Roughly speaking, the formula goes something like this: “X is Y. Not X is not Y”

* oxymorons
    > darkness visible
     
*  affirm by denying its opposite (*Litotes*) 

    form of understatement-by-negative. It’s closely related to a double-negative but it’s not quite the same - “Leaving no stone unturned” is not litotes because there’s no understatement there.

    > “The war situation has developed not necessarily to japan's advantage” - by the then Japanese PM announcing Japan’s surrender in WW2

    Orwell was a proponent of clear language and attacked litotes in a little footnote in his famous essay “Politics and the English Language”:
    > One can cure oneself of the not un- formation by memorizing this sentence: A not unblack dog was chasing a not unsmall rabbit across a not ungreen field.

* Paradox
> Groucho Marx provided the best answer to this question when he was invited to join an exclusive gentlemen's club and responded, "I wouldn't join any club that would have me as a member." By using humor, he both snubbed the snobs and poked fun at himself.
> All animals are equal, but some are more equal than others


* Tautology

    > With malice towards none, with charity towards all - Lincoln. 

----


* one sense described in terms of another (*Synaesthesia.*) 

    > “Harmonious colors” or “Silky voice”     
    > “She smelled the way the Taj Mahal looks by moonlight.” - Raymond Chandler
    
    Some sense combinations work better than others. Sight can often be described in terms of sound: ex. ‘muted colors’, ‘loud colors’

    Touch can be applied to sound. (ex. ‘gravelly voice’ )
    Touch can also be applied to sight. (ex. ‘warm colors’, ‘cool tones’ )
    Smells described in terms of other senses do not produce a good effect.







- Use something that stands for something
>  Sadly so many people confuse egotism with self-esteem. They ain't the same zip code. 




* The grammatically incorrect use of words for creative expression (*Catechresis*)

*  Prose composed of three parts that are perfectly equivalent in structure, length and rhythm (*Tricolon*)

    things that come in threes are inherently funnier, more satisfying, or more effective than other numbers of things. 

    > Ex: “Eat, Pray, Love”       
    > “Pyaar, Ishq aur Mohabbat”       
    > LSD
    > Liberté, égalité, fraternité

    In comedy, it is also called a comic triple. Two is the smallest number of points needed to establish a pattern, and comedians exploit the way people's minds perceive expected patterns to throw the audience off track (and make them laugh) with the 3rd element. 

    > “Lies, damned lies, and statistics"

* the expression of a single idea by two words connected with ‘and’ (*Hendiadys*)
    > e.g. nice and warm

    when one could be used to modify the other, as in nicely warm. For emphasis an adjective-noun form is replaced by a noun-and-noun form.  

    > Instead of saying 'I'm going to the noisy city' you say 'I'm going to the noise and the city'".
    > As a Liverpool fan I am so pleased that Jordan Henderson is having a great world cup, providing the glue and solidity.
    > Sir Southgate needs to have a strong word about focus and cool minds.


* Transferred Epithets

    An epithet is an adjective or adjectival phrase that characterizes a place, a thing, or a person that helps make the characteristics of this thing more prominent.

    Epithets employed by a skillful orator, will be found to be, in fact, so many abridged arguments, the force of which is sufficiently conveyed by a mere hint.

    >  'We ought to take warning from the bloody revolution of France

    the Epithet suggests one of the reasons for our being warned; and that, not less clearly, and more forcibly, than if the argument had been stated at length.

    The New Rhetoric derives its empiricist flavor from a pervasive respect for clarity and directness of language. Rhetors use epithets to direct their audience to see their point of view, using verbal forms of imagery as a persuasive tactic. Orators have a variety of epithets that they can employ that have different meanings. 
    The most common are fixed epithets and transferred epithets. 

A fixed epithet is the repetitive use of the same word or phrase for the same person or object. 

A transferred epithet qualifies a noun other than the person or thing it is describing. This is also known as a hypallage. This can often involves shifting a modifier from the animate to the inanimate; for example, 
> "cheerful money" and "suicidal sky".





> “If you wish to become a better writer you must write every day, and if you wish to become a fiction writer, you must write fiction every day. Thinking about your novel is not writing. Plotting is not writing. Character mapping is not writing. Only writing is writing. And the more you will write, the better you will get. It is that simple, and it is that hard.”  Notice the rhetorical devices at work? ( Anaphora, Epiphora, Antithesis.. )



> “‘Come in,’ I say. The knob turns, and in walks Bade Bhai. Even with bees buzzing inside my head I sit up straight. This is not just another rich asshole. He’s the asshole of all assholes. He flicks the cigar into the corner. Lets the door slide shut. After the click, he waits for a moment. Holds his gaze. Blinks. Then smiles. It’s the smile I’ve seen on the faces of thieves, child molesters, murderers, politicians. A smile of love. Compassion. Brotherhood.” (Alliteration? Anadiplosis? Tricolon? )

[List of rhetorical devices](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Rhetorical_techniques)
-----

- Imagery
    
    they work best when they carry symbolic weight, when they appeal to our senses, when they’re not too elaborate and when they evoke an emotional response. The short story - ‘Symbols and Signs’ by Nabokov is a treasure trove of symbolic images –

> “A few feet away, under a swaying and dripping tree, a tiny unfledged bird was helplessly twitching in a puddle.”

> “As she looked around, trying to hook her mind onto something, it gave her a kind of soft shock, a mixture of compassion and wonder, to notice that one of the passengers—a girl with dark hair and grubby red toenails—was weeping on the shoulder of an older woman.”

> “Across the narrow courtyard, where the rain tinkled in the dark against some ash cans, windows were blandly alight, and in one of them a black-trousered man, with his hands clasped under his head and his elbows raised, could he seen lying supine on an untidy bed. She pulled the blind down and examined the photographs.”

-----

**Funny Wordplay**

[Forms of wordplay](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_forms_of_word_play)

* Neologisms
    * [Familiolects](https://twitter.com/IvaCheung/status/951219131189047296?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw%7Ctwcamp%5Etweetembed&ref_url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.buzzfeed.com%2Fandyneuenschwander%2Fpeople-are-sharing-words-that-only-their-family-us)
    * New Definitions

    > waldosia
    n. [Brit. wallesia] a condition characterized by scanning faces in a crowd looking for a specific person who would have no reason to be there, which is your brain’s way of checking to see whether they’re still in your life, subconsciously patting its emotional pockets before it leaves for the day 

   *  Language Mashups
   > Grubbish
   > Crazzled
   > Trapezing

* Puns

* Eggcorn
    > egg corn for the word acorn        
    > ex-patriot instead of expatriate        
    > mating name instead of maiden name        
    > on the spurt of the moment instead of on the spur of the moment        
    > preying mantis instead of praying mantis        
    > for all intensive purposes instead of for all intents and purposes        

* Malapropism

* Mondegreen
    > The Two Ronnies comedy sketch "Four Candles" is entirely built around mondegreens, including a taciturn customer's request for "fork handles" being misheard as "four candles."
* Spoonerism
    > "Three cheers for our queer old dean!" (rather than "dear old queen," which is a reference to Queen Victoria)      
    > "Is it kisstomary to cuss the bride?" (as opposed to "customary to kiss")      
    > "The Lord is a shoving leopard." (instead of "a loving shepherd")      
    > "A blushing crow." ("crushing blow")      
    > "A well-boiled icicle" ("well-oiled bicycle")      
    > "You were fighting a liar in the quadrangle." ("lighting a fire")      
    > "Is the bean dizzy?" ("Dean busy")      
    > "Someone is occupewing my pie. Please sew me to another sheet." ("Someone is occupying my pew. Please show me to another seat.")      
    > "You have hissed all my mystery lectures. You have tasted a whole worm. Please leave Oxford on the next town drain." ("You have missed all my history lectures. You have wasted a whole term. Please leave Oxford on the next down train.")      
    > "A nosey little cook." (as opposed to a "cosy little nook").



----

**References**

- [“Elements of Eloquence” by Mark Forsyth](https://www.altalang.com/beyond-words/thats-dame-walked-language-film-noir/)
- [How to think of quick-witted comebacks?](http://www.wikihow.com/Think-of-Quick-Witted-Comebacks)
- [How to improve your wit?](http://www.wikihow.com/Improve-Your-Wit)
- [The secret to a quick witted comeback](http://www.bbc.com/capital/story/20160328-the-secret-to-a-quick-witted-comeback)
- [Quick Wit exercises](http://www.strainertin.com/wit.html)

