---
layout: post-journal
title:  How Should One Be
date:   2019-03-21 09:00:11
tag: improv, charisma, creativity, humour, wit
categories: journal
excerpt: improv, charisma, creativity, humour, wit
permalink: /improv
comments: false

---



Lessons from Improvisational theatre. 

Believe in empathy and true human connections. Some people want to manipulate other people for 'fun' or to show off their life hacking skills. That's a 'beta' behaviour. Basically the hidden cost of manipulative behaviour is slow decline of respect for people, yourself and a distinct lack of empathy. Psychopaths are very good at reading people whereas despite being well read in human behaviour. Hacks are hacks, but ultimately if you are unable to respect people, you will inevitably lose respect. I would suggest that best hacks are really basic. Ultimately you need to learn how to connect. That's much better than glib charms. A true leader doesn't need hacks. Never use these strategies for manipulation. If you are really good with it it might work, but what is the damn point? And most of us aren’t really good if the reason is not genuine and authentic. We can all spot from a mile away when someone is trying to take something from us or sell us something. Even if we can’t put our finger on it exactly, we sense something is up. And then we are just waiting for the confirmation moment. “Aha! I knew it!” The best way to apply any of the strategies mentioned above is to have a solid foundation about who we are, to be grounded. And this can only come from your authenticity and vulnerability. Don’t try to say things just to impress or to get validated by others. Be vulnerable, be open, be yourself, in many cases it will disarm people because nobody is actually authentic anymore. Look at your love relationships or friends, I bet some of them are not the type of people who you would spend time with on a first glance but you care about them and appreciate having them in your life. Why? Because you know them, you know their real value. Everyone else is oblivious.

----



**Clean your psychological pipes to have the courage to be vulnerable and authentic**

You might be traumatized, or shame-filled, or resentful. You need to do everything you can to make that channel clean. You need to floss that sucker out with therapy, and coaching, and meditation, and sleep, and running, and good food, and hot-tubs, and friendships, and just a shit ton of weeping for all that has passed down the river of your life. It takes a massive amount of courage and vulnerability to get your channel clean enough that you can be authentic.  This advice applies to everything, from talking technical with a colleague, to presenting to the board, to inspiring your kids. Practice hard, clean out your psychological pipes, and then, when the time comes, let rip on the world with your wit, wisdom, and wokeness.

Invent your own daily practices for what works. Example:


- Meditation (e.g. Mindfulness, Vipassana )
- Yoga  (e.g Hatha yoga, Pranayama...)
- Exercise (e.g.  TABATA/Circuit Training/ HIIT)
- Swimming
- Improv 
- Writing
- Sleep
- Good Food
- Slow exposure to fears and anxieties
- Better friendships: choosing positive, empowering people. staying away from those who drain you.
- Gestalt
- CBT



Love yourself. Including all your flaws. Celebrate the obvious. Keep your positive identity at the back of your mind. Be comfortabe with yourself - If you try to be something you're not, people will be able to pick up on that quickly and see that you're being inauthentic. 


Realize that you are enough. Throw away the idea of living through checkpoints.
	- I used to do this a lot and sometimes I still catch myself thinking it and immediately I readjust my thinking. I used to think that if I achieve Goal A then I could be finally happy or if I achieved Goal B then finally I will be in the place that I need to be. There was always something I needed to do in order to relax and finally enjoy the moment. You are the only one that can take authority over yourself, take control and realize that happiness comes from within, not from the chase of something else. Once you realize that, everything else follows. There is always a gap between where we are and where we would like to be. Learn to accept it. There is no need to run around always looking for the next validation point. You are enough now. Relax. It’s part of the journey.Stop putting your life on hold and just live.
	

5. Be average (p. 66)
* Close enough is perfect.
* Dare to be dull.
* Think "inside" the box.
* Celebrate the obvious.
* What is ordinary to you is often a revelation to others.
* Remember "classics" or "favorites" can be fresh ideas, too.
* Don't make jokes. Make sense


---

**Follow your joy**

* Dress only in What Sparks Joy




---


Wake up to the gifts (p. 102)
* Notice that the glass is half full.
* Treasure the details.
* Who or what is helping you right now?
* Make a point of thanking those with thankless jobs.
* What are you doing to give back?
* Keep the gift moving forward.
* Our smallest actions count. Everything we do has the potential to help others.
* Make "thank you" your mantra.
Be happy, positive and energised (Think Heidi)
* Laugh at other people's amusing stories and compliment them, saying something like, "That's so funny!" People crave being around funny people but might feel annoyed if you always hog the spotlight. Make room for others.
* Make a point of thanking those with thankless jobs. Well Intentioned Compliments to Strangers.
* Cultivate Positive Phrases. Phrases like You bet. Well played. Good idea. Fair enough. Replace ‘I do not have time’ with ‘I have other things in the priority order’. Replace ‘You cannot afford this” with “The price I want to offer this in the market would not be attractive to you”. WITH ‘‘I do not know how to do this’ ‘I feel X would have the Comparative Advantage in this' 
* 1. Say yes (p. 34)
* Just say yes.
* Become a "can do" person.
* Look for the positive spin, for what is right.
* Agree with those around you.
* Cultivate yes phrases: "You bet"; "You are right'; `Good idea"; etc.
* Substitute "Yes *and*" for "Yes *but*." Add something to build the conversation.
* Exercise the yes muscle. This builds optimism and hope.


Face the facts (p. 83)
* Don't fight reality.
* Accept other people as they are.
* Work with what you have been given.
* What *are* the facts? You are probably not noticing all of them.
* Embrace the wobble.
* Insecurity is normal. Count on it.

----

**Leverage your strengths.**

Leverage your strengths  If more people would just focus on taking advantage of their strengths, on focusing to expand themselves to the highest level instead of trying to patch their weakness they would be much more happier and ahead in life. Instead of focusing on your lacks, on what you are missing and feeling like you are never. Your weaknesses are there for a reason, to steer you towards your greatness. The moment you accept them, you accentuate your strengths and your life goes on the offense.

----



---


**Be at the cause, not at the effect .**

Instead of always reacting from your environment and from the triggers that other people give you, set the rhythm of how you want to live your life. Stop asking for permission from others to be great and to do the things that bring you joy because your happiness will always be dictated by other factors out of your control. You will be at the effect of various circumstances. When you choose to stand by your values and your core beliefs, when you are congruent in your thoughts and actions you will set the rhythm and the effect for everything happening around you, like ripples in water. When you are the cause, nothing can phase you, because everything you do and feel becomes a choice. In return you spread value to everyone around you


----

**Get Stuff Done**

Decide what you want to do and work incrementally towards achieving that.

 Don’t confuse action with motion .  Instead of running around in circles, take clear action steps towards your purpose. Feeling like you are always doing so much and keeping yourself busy is a waste of energy. Focus on the 20% of actions needed to accomplish 80% of what matters. This rule might sound like a cliché, but sometimes the biggest truths hide under the obvious reasons. A windmill might look like it’s spinning so fast, but still it doesn’t go anywhere.ough, let go and focus on expanding your strengths. 

4. Start anywhere (p. 59)
* All starting points are equally valid.
* Begin with what seems obvious.
* Once it is under way any task seems smaller.
* When speaking in public don't use a script. Write down questions and answer them.
* Talk to your audience. Don't give a lecture.
* Trust your mind.
* Edit and develop ideas *as* you speak.


11. Act now (p. 122)
* The essence of improving is action.
* Act in order to discover what comes next.
* You don't need to feel like doing something to do it.
* Schedule a difficult task and stick to your timetable.
* Invite a buddy to join you in doing what you need to do.
* Do the hard things first.
* To find a new perspective, try doing something a different way.
* Sometimes *not doing* is what is needed.
* If you can't get out of it, *get into it*.


8. Stay on course (p. 88)
* Every improvisation has a point.
* Don't let feelings alone run your show.
* There is meaning in everything we do, even small tasks.
* Keep an eye on where you are going. If you miss the target, adjust your aim.
* Ask often "What is my purpose?"
* What would not get done if you were not here?


3. Just show up (p. 52)
* Walk, run, bike, skip to the places that you need to be.
* Motivation is not a prerequisite for showing up.
* Start your day with what is important.
* Use rituals to get things going.
* Showing up to help others is already service.
* Change your vantage point and refresh your mind.
* Location, location, location--in real estate and in life.
* Be on time for the sake of others.
* Show up on time for yourself. Lost time is never found.



----


**Start thinking of your life as a gift you can give to others.**

You need to learn what's too long and what's too short, which depends on your audience and their moods (you need to learn how to read people); you need to learn to make your experiences visceral, which means describing the cheesecake you ate in a way that makes your listeners taste it; you need to learn how to to tease by withholding information until people are itching for a payoff; you need to learn about story structure: beginnings, middles, and ends. You don't just dump whatever is on your mind into the conversation; you purposefully shape it to make it interesting

---


**Make Others Look Good**

A good improviser is very altruistic by nature. One of the ground rules of improv is: make sure the other person looks good. When you watch two improvisers on stage, you can easily see this habit at work. They do not try to outshine the other person. Instead, they make strong choices that set others up for success. What choices do you make as a leader that sets other up for success? Gush Over People. Make them feel and look good.People will forget what you said, but they’d remember how you made them feel. Make People Feel Good. Leave conversation partners better than they were before you entered. (When you talk ill of someone, people associate those ills with you). Trigger emotions: Make them laugh, Really listen to problems and dreams, huG longer,  Don’t take yourself too seriously. Use fewer words and easier sentences but express them with more emotion. * Be unexpectedly helpful and courteous. Tell stories

---


Experiment

Before they start doing anything, great improvisers focus on the big picture. The details will follow spontaneously once they start improvising and experimenting. If you want to plan all the details in advance, you will spend a lot of time only to discover that reality is more resilient than you thought. It is only through experimentation that you will find out what does and doesn’t work. Practice exploration and discovery. Dare To Fail…It’s very important that a great improviser dares to fail. It is the opposite of trying to prevent every mistake. If you try to control the whole situation, you end up spending more time and money instead of making the mistake and learning from it. And learning from mistakes is a vital part of improvisation (and leadership). So go for it, fail fast and learn fast

---

**Entertain yourself, not others . Do things to amuse yourself. Never be bored.**

I learned this lesson from my brother. He always laughs about the stupidest shit. It could be a gif depicting a squirrel falling from a tree, or funny lyrics, or a fart – his sense of humor is what you could call simple. The point is, he is constantly entertaining himself. Himself is key because he doesn’t do it for others. Everyone is welcome to join him and see what’s so funny, but he doesn’t try to make others laugh. If they do, cool. If not, then he has fun on his own.  



Being interesting is about making the world around you interesting. People who are funny are usually depressed; their continuous desperate attempts to make the world around them interesting being the source of their humour. By doing that others get drawn to him, and become curious why he has so much fun. Everyone wants to be around fun people. It adds value to their lives. Trust me, no one ever forgets the guy who made them laugh. But everyone forgets (or at least avoids) the clown who tried to be funny for two hours.

[It helps  to have something wrong with yourself and be comfortable with it: to be relatable](https://www.brainpickings.org/2014/02/05/we-killed-book-phyllis-diller/)

---

**Speak your mind. Have an opinion, even if it might piss some people off. And disagree if you disagree. No sacred cows**

Be blunt, be controversial, be real . You can’t become memorable by always playing it safe. Everyone wants to be liked, and most people avoid conflict like the plague. But by doing that, you position yourself in the middle. Neither A, nor B. Neither black, nor white. People remember extremes, not mediocrity.   By doing that, you will instantly become more interesting and as a consequence more memorable.

Be irreverent. I don't mean you have to be crude (though you can be), and, certainly, humor is more than just irreverence (though when you combine irreverence with great facility with language, you're definitely in the ballpark), but irreverence is crucial.   If you divide topics in to "funny" and "not funny," you can't be funny. If you think, "don't go there," you can't be funny. If you think, "too soon," you can't be funny.   I'm not saying you should always say what's on your mind. I'm saying that inside your head, you must be irreverent. If you feel guilty for having certain thoughts -- even if you don't speak them -- you're going to be humor impaired. You must have the thought, enjoy the thought (no matter how wicked -- especially if it's wicked), and then you can decide whether or not to voice it. But if you curtail your thoughts or have internal sacred cows, you're too constrained for comedy.   The least funny people tend to be arch conservatives and extreme liberals -- people so righteous that their values become sacred to them. "How many radical feminists does it take to screw in a lightbulb?" "One, and it's not funny!" We all know the type. They exist on both sides of the political spectrum. I know Christians who get extremely offended by jokes about God. I also have a devout Christian friend who regularly makes jokes about Jesus's cock. He's not afraid to "go there." Jokes don't shake his faith. He believes God has a sense of humor.   If you're a fan of Louis C.K., you know he adores his kids. He's a pretty big celebrity, but he refuses to work more than half of each week, because he wants to spend the rest of the time with his daughters. Yet listen to how free he feels to be irreverent about them. What's the most important thing in your life -- the thing you feel most strongly about? Are you ready to dump poop on it?  

---


**Intentionally make mistakes. Drop the persona of perfection** 

**There are no mistakes and the way you are supposed to be. The key is that you are enough. You know enough.** Just have natural reactions. Don’t exert to be funny.  To be unapologetic and just be, just go on, no matter what. 

**Break routines and see what happen when you do so.**

If, like many people, you’re scared of screwing-up and making mistakes, it can be helpful to sometimes intentionally make mistakes, just to see what happens. By doing this, we challenge the beliefs we hold about the way the world works. When we do something that we assume will not work, we get to explore a space that would otherwise not be visited by ourselves or by others. In the process we often discover little treasures waiting for us.

What this looks like in practice is just being fucking weird every now and then.

- Say something weird. 
- Move weirdly. 
- Do something potentially embarrassing. 
- Sing in the shower. 
- Dance in front of a mirror. 
- Challenge the status quo. For example, if people at work (including you) often seem to be trying to hide the fact that they don’t understand most of what’s going on, experiment with calling that out, “I have no idea what’s going on here. Does anyone else know?” You’ll probably feel a release of tension in the room

Make mistakes,  If you are not making mistakes, you are not improvising.  Be like a turtle: stick our your neck to make progress. When you screw up, say "Ta-dah!" and take a bow. Mistake? Focus on what comes next Let go of outcomes. Cultivate a flexible mind. Be Flexible…An improviser never really knows what he will be confronted with, so he should not be too fixated on following his own plan. He has to be willing to abandon his own ideas and go along with other people’s. Flexibility also helps to create new associations and connections.

Make mistakes, please (p. 113)
* If you are not making mistakes, you are not improvising.
* Be like a turtle: stick our your neck to make progress.
* When you screw up, say "Ta-dah!" and take a bow.
* Mistake? Focus on what comes next.
* Let go of outcomes. Cultivate a flexible mind.
* Mistakes may actually be blessings.
* Become a confident mistake-maker. Lighten up.
* Try bricolage--use what is there artfully.
* Admitting a mistake shows character.


vs




-----

**Don’t try to think think up words. Rather, try to feel a certain way. Control what you feel -- not what you're expressing.** 


Words come by automatically. Feeling are central. Ideas are secondary. 
Our brains are horrible at distinguishing fantasy from reality (think about how scared you got last time you watched a scary movie, even though you knew it was just a movie). 


Examples: 

- [Cate Blanchett's emotional interview with Jimmy Fallon](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3xhImxF1H98) 
- [Ben Stiller's emotional iterview with Jimmy Fallon](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zkESoUBVQDs) 
- Improv Exercise: Portraying the same phrase with different emotions or with exaggerated emotions.



To feel positive, think about something or someone you love for a few moments before an interaction with someone. Your positive emotions will show, and your conversation partner will respond in kind. 

Pratice the feeling of **Yes, and...**. When you get a piece of information from another actor, first, accept it as fact and second, add a little bit more information to it.  Say Yes, and… The first lesson that an improviser learns is to accept every offer that is made. This basic rule is known as ‘Yes, anding.’ This principle allows improvisers to be positive and always look for new directions and opportunities. By saying ‘yes,’ you accept an idea ‘and’ you develop the idea further, making it better. An idea will quickly grow if you’re positive. You also validate the person making the offer, which opens the door to communication and collaboration.  Look for the positive spin, for what is right. Interpret everything as something positive ,  

**“If this is true, what else is true?”**

**People are going to forget what you told them, but they will remember what you made them feel.** Giving people your full presence makes them feel like they're center of your universe. **It isn't about how you make people feel about you. It's how you make them feel about themselves.**


**Tact is the ability to treat people the way they see themselves.** What this means in practice: to communicate your message in such a way that fits with the identity, values and worldview of the other person.



If there's one thing the human mind does well, it's interpreting human emotion. I was at the Exploratorium with a friend a few weeks back, and we saw an exhibit on this. We sat facing each other, each each with a list of ten phrases (e.g., "I really like you," "I'm cold," and, "Can we go now?") Then we took turns holding up a mask that covered our face -- except the eyes -- and thinking about one of the phrases. The unmasked partner had to guess which.  Using nothing but my eyes as a reference, my partner got nine out of ten correct.  

-----


**Listen To understand, not to respond** 

Forget that you are being watched. Live in the space of your situation and engage with the idea space. So often we listen just long enough to get an idea of what the other person is talking about and then we start to prepare our response, while they are still talking. This is “listening to respond.” Instead, it’s better to “listen to understand”. Visualize what the other person is saying. Listen till the last word of a sentence. 
Exercise: Play Last Word, First Word. Next time you are having a conversation with someone, focus on what they are saying, really listen and then keep listening until you hear the last word of what they’re saying. Then start your response with a word that begins with the last letter of their last word. It will force you to listen all the way through rather than getting caught up with your own inner monologue.

Listen to Understand… Many leaders listen just enough to respond. Cue sound bites from any political debate or town hall meeting. How many of us listen to understand. When having a conversation, do you think about what you are going to say next? Is your response run through the filter of ‘agenda’? Active listening facilitates understanding and authentic connection. This requires one to be “in the moment”. Which leads us to…The first key to being well spoken is making others feel well heard. We focus too much on what we should say next, formulating witty responses in our heads instead of giving full presence to the person talking. Art of listening is as important as art of speaking. When the other person feel truly "heard", that person will perceive you are caring about what s/he is saying, and this may make you appear more likable and better spoken.

----

**Watch the colour of the eyes of your partner. Observe the physical sensations in your body. Your face. Your toes. How and what do you feel right now?**

Focus on the colors in the eyes of your conversation partner. It's cool to notice the flecks and arrays in their irises. It brings you to the present. And it makes people feel like you're having some kind of deep, cool moment. Don't be creepy and overdo it, though. A little goes a long way. 

Do this for a split second, and it will reset your mind.


----


**Write and speak a lot every day. Everytime you speak, do it boldly and clearly.** To get better at generating streams of words, you need to practice generating streams of words. 


Being able to say the first thing that comes to mind when you’re onstage is invaluable!

Exercise:

- Start a conversation with a random person on a bus or other means of public transport. Conversational skills are very important in improvisational theatre as you will find yourself in different scenes where you'll have to make your character more believable + you never know what crazy stuff your fellow bus rider has to offer, from settings to characters and situations.
- Write every morning, and I usually have a least one period of social time every day. Once you have stable and good quality content, you can work on tuning the details of how it’s delivered. You can work on tone, and inflection, and timing. You can tease-out that pause before the punchline while making eye contact with someone in the audience. You can slow down, stand up tall, and survey the crowd. You can breathe deeply and soften down into your legs so that your consciousness fills your body and the room, so that you can enthrall and delight the audience, so that you can entice them into your world and entertain them like royalty in your palace of presence.
- Plunge into the sea of language and splash around in it. Almost all humor (except situational and physical humor) is rooted in language: jokes, puns, anecdotes, observations, funny stories... So make English (or whatever your native language is) your home and visit every room. Read constantly, write constantly, care about each word you write, try writing poetry, and so on.  The good news is that humor works in any vernacular. Jerry Seinfeld and Chris Rock speak differently, but both love words. So your goal shouldn't be to speak like someone else. It should be to plum the depth of your own style of speaking -- to expand your vocabulary and expressiveness in ways that fit your personality.   It may seem as if this has nothing to do with being funny, but the more you play with words -- the more expert and relaxed you become with them, the more you flirt with them, fight with them, mangle them, and coin them -- the more avenues you'll create for humor to slip out. 




----

## Practice Exercises

Don't prepare (p. 44)
* Give up planning. Drop the habit of thinking ahead.
* Attend carefully to what is happening right now.
* Allow yourself to be surprised.
* Stockpiling ideas for future use is unnecessary.
* Trust your imagination. There is always something in the box.
* Welcome whatever floats into your mind.
* Fear is a matter of misplaced attention. Focus on redirecting it.
The trick is to practice like crazy and then let go and surrender into the present-moment. You have to learn how to let your soft animal body take over and channel all that goodness automagically through a fresh pipe. 
Fits well with Napier's framework of improvisation. His goal is to throw out the "rules of improvisation", and instead focus on following one's instincts. Whether or not you buy into the idea, forcing yourself to be creative for 20 minutes on end is no easy thing, and it'll certainly show you what habits you have under pressure (maybe you do that drunk cowboy character a little too much.)



Take notes on:

- Get in the habit of knowing how you feel right now and where you hold tension.
- How often, if ever, you shoot other peoples' ideas down. 
- Get in the habit of forgiving yourself when you make a mistake.


-----


**Free associate one thought with another: go and explore wherever they take you** 

As you go about your life, associate like crazy. Let your mind and imagination run wild and free. If you see an interesting object, start word-associating with it. 
Seeing a pretty flower might make you think of a vineyard, and then Jack and the Beanstalk, then geese, then Ryan Gosling, etc etc. Make those associations quick and snappy and try to see how far away from the original object you can get.

Caution: Don't do this at job interviews, where structured communication is key. 

Think of a random word, and have a friend do the same. On the count of three, both of you say the word you are thinking of, at the same time. Count to three again, and this time both of you try to say a word that is somehow between the two words you said in the first round. Continue doing this, with the goal of eventually both saying the same word. This will strengthen your ability to draw connections between things that are not obviously related.

---

Voiceover -- Go to a public place and watch two people having a conversation. Perform a "voiceover" in your head of what they might be saying, giving different voices for the two characters.  Watch vox pop videos on youtube and try to imitate normal people.
Observe animals when they do animal stuff. Cut the sound on a movie and try to voice over. Do it with with a wildlife documentary.

Practice a new accent, Figure out how you talk - quietly, singing, loud, screaming, questioning. Stop talking high pitched through the nose, clear airways, breathe. 

Imitate the Most Articulate Celebrities and Public Figures - Do your best impressions of highly articulate and successful talk show hosts, news anchors, radio hosts, actors, voice actors, etc. This is a great way to invoke benchmarks that you can use as comparisons to your own voice habits and articulation level. 
Practice Sentences and Paragraphs with Audio Recorders - Use audio editors such as Audacity(Free Audio Editor and Recorder) and Practice 15 - 30 minutes a day until your general speech habits improve. Place emphasis on words, sentences, and paragraphs that are most difficult for you to articulate. Repeat certain sentences and paragraphs until they soundto pleasant 

Visualize Yourself Speaking Well on National Television and in Front of Large Crowds - Believe it or not, your unsatisfactory speaking habits and articulation may be rooted in the fear of being the center of attention and embarrassing yourself. Your lack of articulation could result from tension and a certain level of social anxiety that result from your own thoughts and perceptions. Picture yourself talking in situations that you think are well out of your league, and you'll start to develop the peace of mind and confidence to articulate your speech carefully in situations that would normally intimidate you. 

---


When you are out and about, watch people,  how they behave when they are on their own, how they relate in a group, how they get each other attention. Notice when it is that people actually have a conversation and when it is that they just take it in turn to brag. 

Be In The Moment…A great improviser lives in the here and now, in the present. He is alert and is able to respond instantly and sharply to changes or sudden twists and turns. This means that all sorts of other thoughts do not distract him, but that he is totally focused on things that are happening around him at that particular moment in time. By being in the present, and not judging the situation, all options are open and everything is possible.  Life *is* attention. Notice everything, particularly the details. Become a detective. Shift your attention from yourself to others  Make an effort to remember names and faces. Keep on waking up.  This moment only happens once. Treasure it. Avoid multitasking. Attend to one thing at a time. Don't prepare  Give up planning.   Attend carefully to what is happening right now. Allow yourself to be surprised.  Welcome whatever floats into your mind. Fear is a matter of misplaced attention. Focus on redirecting it.

---

Start with a concept, like seeing a disheveled-looking man ordering a coffee at Starbucks, and build up a story and a life around him. Create a history for him and plan a future. Ask yourself what his family is like, what he does for a living, what he does for fun, etc. If you notice something suitable for world-building, like two squirrels coming out of a tree, construct a fictional universe for them to live in. How are these squirrels related? What’s their language? Is the tree their house? Their place of work? Do they interact with other animals or are squirrels the only sentient animals in this world? Ask yourself world-building questions and then answer them.


---

Grab a pen, some paper and a timing device. In a few minutes time per subject, come up with as many uses as possible for the following objects (think of five random, unrelated nouns):
* A Brick
* One shoe
* A Rope
* A Tape measure
* A Stereo Speaker

Here's a quick example by Max Matterson:
- Pencil might give you: lead, words, sentence, write, sharpen, draw, pictures
- Judges could give you: sentence court, wig, life, oath, right 
- What links these two things together? You might say wright(right) and sentence... Now put them together in a joke:
- In what way are pencils and judges the same? They pass sentences, always have the last word and are wright all the time

 
- Take any two concepts:
	- Eye Trouble: Lazy eyes, tearing, cross eyed, can’t see well, have trouble reading, need glasses, world looks funny or different.
	- Dyslexia: Have trouble reading, letters and numbers look funny or different, can’t read well, can’t read quickly, have trouble concentrating.
	- These are just a couple examples thrown together in a hurry to give you the idea. Obviously there are lots of other associations we might make from these, and yet we can already see that there are some pretty useful links between the two. So all we need to do is to make these links by applying a bit of lateral thinking and then presto. You have a quick joke like...
If you are cross eyed and dyslexic, does that mean that you can see perfectly?

Example: What’s the connection between a skeleton and a bar? 
A skeleton asks a barman for a pint of beer and a mop.

There is no connection between the two except that we recognize when the skeleton drinks there is nowhere for the liquid to go except the floor. What makes it funny is that the skeleton is unable to drink but wasting his money and good beer.



Play with someone:
With a friend, brainstorm a list of random objects. Write each one down on a piece of paper, fold them up, and put them in a bowl. Draw a piece of paper at random, and set a timer for 1 minute. Come up with as many uses for that object as you can before the timer goes off. Read them aloud, crossing out the uses that the other person also listed. Whoever has the longest list at the end of this process wins. 

----

Anthropomorphize everything and develop personalities for them. I find this is easiest to do with cars because their front grills are very expressive faces and their bodywork lends them a good personality. I think of BMWs as snooty french men (because of the moustache) and then the the different models of BMWs have different personalities. One thing that humans really have going for us is that we see humanity all around us. We are trained to spot faces wherever we look, like in the front grill of a car or an electrical socket. Where there is a face, there is a character. 
 

----

Character relay. 
Start a timer that beeps every 30 seconds (check the video below for a youtube link that does just this) and then, for that 30 seconds, begin a character monologue. There is no prompt. In fact, as much as you can, avoid preplanning any of the characters, or even thinking about the exercise. Jump right into the improvisation, and say whatever is on your mind. This is the point of the exercise.  After those 30 seconds have elapsed, instantly jump to a new character. Ideally, make it as different as possible from your previous character. Do the monologue for 30 seconds, repeat. This continues for as long as you like-- I've only done it for about 20 minutes at a time, but Napier (the author) claims to have put people through the ringer for an entire hour at a time.
	- For example: Pretend to be a crotchety, 90 year old woman for 5 minutes. Practice her voice, stance, feelings, actions and reactions. 
	- Great! Now do the same for a toddler, a stuffy English butler, a hyperactive dog, a stoned west-coast surfer, etc. etc. etc. Create different characters by playing with the way you walk, talk, move, and improvise (out loud) monologues.

---


Set a clock for 10 minutes. Start with a character monolog. After no more than 60 seconds, you should slip into a two character scene with that character. From there, keep "cutting to" or wiping to related scenes, flashbacks, flashforwards, or completely new scenes. The two goals are a) to improvise nonstop for 10 minutes and b) to create as many characters and situations in 10 minutes as possible. Do one of these as a practice, and then do one for real. Let yourself be creative in your "cut-to" situations. This exercise strengthens an improvisor's sense of responsibility onstage - you quickly learn that you can't bail on a scene or check out mentally! It also builds your confidence, playfulness and your facility in being able to play and heighten a moment in a long form.

---

Solo Three Line Scenes . 
These will feel strange at first, but it's a great exercise to add to your warm-ups, as it gets your brain moving and gets you to commit fully to a range of characters. In character, initiate a scene with an opening line. Then, changing your physicality and even your physical position, Immediately switch to a contrasting character - the larger the contrast, the better, and deliver the second line of the scene. Then, move back into the original position, physicality and attitude of the first character and deliver the third line of the scene. For the first few of these, start off being easy on yourself, then tighten up the scenes. Focus on getting out the who, what and where in those scant three lines. Work through negative and dismissive responses until you are only giving yourself positive agreements with each three-line scene. Push your range of characters and your range of contrasts - you should keep doing these until you are well beyond your stock characters.


Solo Two Character Scenes/three character scenes .
Once you have warmed up with three line scenes, slow down and try an extended two-character scene. Focus on giving gifts to yourself - "Rosemary, your pale gauntness is delicious!" Let these go a little long so that you can explore the possibilities of being the sole driver of a scene. As you slip between characters, let yourself be physically neutral. Take care to keep the characters' physicalities distinct. After a couple of these, challenge yourself to try three character and group scenes.


----


Grab any postcard or photo or picture at random, and proceed to articulate in detail, preferably in a loud voice, what's in the picture
whats the theme/what's in the foreground/what's in the background/what's in the centre or middle/what's on the right/what's on the left/what's at the top/what's at the bottom/what at the top-right/top-left/bottom-right/bottom-left/what's happening/is it inside or outside/who's there/how's the weather and/or timing; how do you know/compare and contrast/how do you feel/what do you like/what do you dislike/would you like to be in the postcard or photo or picture; why and why not?


---

Get 10 index cards.  Write one object on each of them.  Anything.  You can write "flowers" on one and "Belgian waffle" on another.  Now take a few moments to write five settings on a sheet of paper.  Examples can include: "ballroom dancing class," "hostage negotiation," "brewery tour."

Shuffle your cards.  Pull two out and put them face up in front of you.  Create a  story involving these two items in the first setting that you listed.  It doesn't have to be humorous at first, just plausible.  As you keep going, you can try to make it humorous.  Repeat until you complete the set.  Reshuffle.  Repeat.  Make it funnier each time.


[Scenes From a Hat](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j67PMtU8PZ0)


----

Add details.  

---

Practice it in A-B storytelling games, where A produces a bunch of material, and B connects them, 


---


Techniques:



- Sarcasm: 
	- Saying the opposite of what is clearly evident.  Taboo Topics: Death, Sex and STDs. Watch every episode of Blackadder and remember Captain Black Adder's every response to Baldrick's 'cunning plans.
- Satire. 
- Relate and then violate expectations: Take people to a point we can all emotionally relate to. And then, BAM!, they blow it to smithereens. Once you can relate to them, they're along for the ride.
- Neologisms and Puns (e.g. Familiolect)
- Reincorporation: Look back instead of just forward: look for things you’ve shelved and reincorporate them.

> The improviser has to be like a man walking backwards. He sees where he has been, but he pays no attention to the future. His story can take him everywhere, but he still has to balance it and give it shape, by remembering incidents that have been shelved and reincorporating them. 


- Imagery
- Analogies.
- Snowclones
- Well Known Idioms
- Dialogues
- References. Have ideas and themes and thing bring the out with concrete examples. Paraphrasing is the swiss army knife of communication: allows you to reframe, or pause, or think about the answer.
- or (joke) doing the opposite of what asked





----


**List of Improv Games:** 


 - Story, Story, Die
 - Question, Question, Die
 - Chinese Whisper with Mimicry, with Exagerration
 - Freeze Tag
 - First Word, Last Word
 - Alphabet
 - Audience Word Incorporation
 - Portraying same phrase with different emotions
 - Playing alliterative characters doing something
 - Dance Copying game
 - Mime with Touch, See, Dance, No Touch, No see, No Dance
 - Who’s where? What’s where? Eyes Closed. 
 - Eyes Closed walking, introductions 
 - Eyes Closed Number Countdown
 - Ball Catching Game Count Up
 - 4 People Photofames, Walking, Sitting, Ducking, Bending
- Gibberish with Translator
- I’m a tree



**Study how they do it**

- Mae West
- Mark Twain
- Dorothy Parker
- Wilde
- Churchill
- Shaw
- Groucho
- Han and Leia (Star Wars)
- Piers Morgan
- Jeremy Clarkson
- Scalia
- John Oliver
- Tom Lehrer
- Woody Allen
- Tim Minchin
- Trevor Noah
- Kurt Vonnegut
- Simon Rich
- Tina Fey
- Douglas Adams
- Miranda July
- Louis CK
- Bo Burnham's "what."  I have to admit, the above clip makes me jealous when I watch it. I wish when was in my 20s I had had 1/10 the talent Bo has. The whole clip is good but the last ten minutes I was like (starting at 52:40): Oh my god, how did he come up with that?
- Jimmy Fallon is changing late-night TV. There's no way I can keep up with that sort of energy. But I love his SNL audition reel and the sheer talent he shows
- Seth Rogen: injects humor into an incredibly serious issue in a congressional hearing
- Amy Schumer
- Marina Franklin: carries a sweet innocence, and then violates expectations 
- "Food" by Jim Gaffigan
- Anthony Jeselnik: I like how he connects with the audience just when you think they should be hating hi
- Daniel Tosh. Daniel Tosh is the reason I stopped using powerpoints in my talks. Because you can compare how funny he is between his standup and his show Tosh where he has youtube videos as props. He's about 1/10 as funny in the show.I then read later that powerpoints use a different part of the brain and that using them in a talk forces the brain to over-work so people can't focus on your talk as well.
- Andy Samberg's Harvard commencement speech:  I don't think he makes sense for even one second during the entire speech. Which means he totally goes for it. He's committed to the end to stay in character no matter how confused the audience is. It's hard to be that committed when you have no idea what people are thinking. 


**Recommended Books**

- Improvise: Scene from the Inside Out by Mick Napier: This book will make you feel angry that you could have been doing this all along, and then it will make you happy that now you know.
- The Small Cute Book of Improv by Jill Bernard. The world’s best improv book by volume. It is incredibly small (20 pages, each of them sx by six inches) but packed with great advice delivered with fun. The revised edition (“now less small!”) contains some mini-essays that on their own would justify the cost.
- Impro for Storytellers by Keith Johnstone
- [More recommendations](https://www.quora.com/What-books-on-improvisational-theatre-do-you-recommend)

**References**

- [Social Status](http://lesswrong.com/lw/b0t/social_status_hacks_from_the_improv_wiki/)
- [How can I become a funnier person? Answe by Marcus Geduld](https://www.quora.com/How-can-I-become-a-funnier-person/answer/Marcus-Geduld)
- [What standup comedy taught me about life](https://medium.com/the-mission/what-standup-comedy-taught-me-about-public-speaking-and-life-7b251d768d4)
- [List of Improv games](https://github.com/pamelafox/improvlists/wiki/Setlists)
- [Notes from The Charisma Myth](https://github.com/mgp/book-notes/blob/master/the-charisma-myth.markdown)
- [How to Improvise](http://www.dangoldstein.com/howtoimprovise.html)
- [The secret to a quick witted comeback](http://www.bbc.com/capital/story/20160328-the-secret-to-a-quick-witted-comeback)
- [Belina Raffy : How Improv Can Save The World](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zi1EGkh_vzg)
- [Matt Walsh Reveals His Keys to Improv](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0ispdtG_TIA)
- [How to become charismatic?](https://www.quora.com/What-can-I-do-within-a-month-to-become-more-charismatic-Would-improv-or-acting-classes-help-Perhaps-something-that-helps-me-as-a-speaker)
- [Be funny without telling jokes](http://www.wikihow.com/Be-Funny-Without-Telling-Jokes)
- [How to think of quick-witted comebacks?](http://www.wikihow.com/Think-of-Quick-Witted-Comebacks)
- [How to improve your wit?](http://www.wikihow.com/Improve-Your-Wit)
- [Eva Glasrud's advice on charisma](http://www.thehappytalent.com/blog/these-specific-behaviors-will-make-you-more-charismatic-starting-right-now)
- [Solo and two person improv warmups](https://cajuput.wordpress.com/2013/05/13/the-30-minute-solo-and-two-person-improv-warm-up/)
- [What it means to be in your head](https://peopletriggers.wordpress.com/2010/12/29/what-it-actually-means-to-be-in-your-head/)
- [How to make your writing funnier](https://ed.ted.com/lessons/how-to-make-your-writing-funnier-cheri-steinkellner#review)
- [Quick Wit exercises](http://www.strainertin.com/wit.html)
- [How is Wayne Brady of whose line is it anyway so good?](https://www.quora.com/How-did-Wayne-Brady-get-so-good-at-making-up-lyrics-on-Whose-Line-Is-It-Anyway)
- [Review of Improv Wisdom by Patricia Ryan Madson ](https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/460161986?book_show_action=true&from_review_page=1)

----


# Networking Events


- Get Pre event practice and momentum by talking to Baristas, Co-workers etc. for 1-3 minutes. 
- Wrong question “How do I start a conversation with [Specific Magic Snowflake Person]?”
	- Right question: “How many people have you ALREADY started conversations with today?
		+ With each small conversation you start, you’re actually doing two things at once:
			+ You’re building the skill of starting conversations. Skills are something that you can improve over time, and they become a core part of who you are and how you see the world.
			+  Newton’s first law: An object in motion stays in motion. You’re building momentum so that you can start more conversations throughout your day. It’s a virtuous cycle.

- Have an exit strategy: No one wants to feel stuck in a conversation, an easy script to politely end the conversation is: "I've got to run, it was nice meeting you [Name]." 
	- Bonus: Having an exit plan will make you feel more comfortable jumping into those conversations.
	- How to end:: 
	-  End Gracefuly. With a compliment and summary. I really appreciate the advice on. Well, thanks for ...
	-  Be Honest and Courteous
    * I would love to talk but i have to hurry… would you like to meet up sometime later..”
    * Well/So…its been great catching up with you.
    * “Just wanted to ensure..”
    * If they approached: “Is there anything else i can help you with”
    * Lets go checkout the X. Have you met my friend. 
    * Can you introduce me to?/ Do you know anyone here.."
    * Have a purpose and be honest. “I wanted to talk to the host”
    * "I don’t want to monopolise your time."
    * Carry two drinks.
    * "Lets go say hi!/ lets checkout the buffet"
    * "Ah, but don't let me keep you."

I’m in a rush. This is especially good when meeting new people and you notice they are extra introverted, shy or in a hurry. “Hi, I have 5 minutes before I need to run and do this errand but I just wanted to ask you if…”. Some people feel trapped and surrounded when someone pushes themselves onto them. By setting a deadline for the interaction they are more at ease and open. 


----


Exude calm and sense of security, that is "I do not about other people think."

----


Be at home, instead of being like an intruder. Play the host: Approach and Be approachable.  Moving comfortably and gracefully. Spreading out your body to full comfort. Taking up a lot of space with your body. Move with courage and confidence.  Keep your body language open, tall, and engaging. Lean back, relax, smile, people watch, and make eye contact. You, nicely dressed, peppy, walk with charisma into the room, and act like you own the damn place.  Imagine yourself as the man, and everybody else like an inanimate object.  Feel as if you've built the building, like you've invited everyone to the party, like the people are yours to own.  This may turn some folks off, but you don't care about those.  


Assume Everyone is Your Friend - When I go into the room, I act like everyone is already my friend. I will talk with them about what I talk to friends about, once we have a bit of rapport, I’ll tease them a bit, like I would a friend. Even if they are cold to me upfront, I don’t let that change how I act towards them. Eventually, most people eventually warm up, because it’s exhausting trying to be mean to someone who’s treating you like their friend.


---

Sit where you will be noticed.

----


Walk in with a smile. Remember, other people are shy and anxious as well!   Introduce yourself.  Have a good elevator pitch - who you are and what you bring to the table  tell your story well and concisely. you want to give the other person a good idea of your skills, qualifications, and where you’re looking to go in your career. Get a conversation going.  
 

---

**Bad Practice: Don't try to argue with people 'just for the sake of it' or to 'test if they come up with good counter-points'.** It's disrespectful. If you really want to talk about an issue in a debate format, express your desire and see whether the other person agrees or not.

--


**Good practice: Buddy up** 

It's not easy being charismatic, funny, witty and sharp all the time in conversation in your own. One great way to make conversations easier is to pair up with a good friend when you chat with others. This way you have someone there that you can always lean on in case the new conversation doesn't flow that well. 

Creating togetherness through storytelling aka “Us mentality”. Basically when talking with a person you create a story around yourselves, a bubble for your own reality. This can be applied to an individual person but it’s also used as a common technique by public speakers when trying to pull the audience into their own reality. Us mentality can be projected in any tense:
Past: “Oh, I didn’t know you went to Jamaica last year. Imagine if we both met there how much fun we would’ve had doing this and that etc… I have a friend who knows this place etc…”
Present: “Why are you here at this event? Oh networking for your startups? How about the two us team up together and help each other find the right people for our business, I have some friends that might help you and you can also introduce me to your niche because I’m interested. It will be our own little internal conspiration, they won’t know what hit them”
Future: “Oh you like doing long road trips? Have you ever been on a Eurotrip? Imagine how cool it would be if we went exploring together. I can be the driver, you can hold the map and direct me, I’m really bad at directions”This builds comfort and also makes people feel that they are onto something that no one else knows.

---

Be genuinely interested in a person: What was your background? The most interesting project they worked on? Ask open ended questions. Can spring from observing your surroundings. 

Be genuinely interested. Get their story out.  . Be a patient listener (it is this, not fast talking, that gets a con man his coups). Learn to master questions - One of the best ways to show you're a great listener is to ask great questions that are really relevant to the topic someone's talking about. Have a genuine curiosity to get to know people. The second key to being well spoken is by asking questions you genuinely care or are curious about, versus ones you think will make you sound smart or clever. People palpate authenticity from the way a question is used: whether it is a genuine question, or just a way to make the asker show cleverness or superiority. Of course, questions can be genuine AND clever, as long as your questions are truthful to your interest and engagement. Have something to talk about: pay attention to timely topics and pay attention to what other people are paying attention to. It doesn't all have to come from "you" -- I have few original ideas and even fewer insightful ones -- but I can share insight I have observed or read about from others, and I can be a bridge or connector in a conversation. You may want to start by becoming a connector or bridge in a conversation, versus a "driver" of conversations.

> I knew a girl in college who everyone wanted to be around. Whenever she was around, the gathering was filled with laughter and meaning. She was one person everyone wanted to talk to. Some of my old college friends still talk about our “good old days”—which included that mystical college girl who led our gatherings into realms of purpose, healing, spirituality, friendship and meaning.  
> 
> This is what I discovered about her: No one really knew much about her.
She wasn’t particularly “special” in anything—her wealth, looks, or smarts. One outstanding thing about her was that was quite pleasant, pleasant to the point that nothing out of the ordinary about her distracted us, and then, again, nothing really interesting, either. Yet she was the center of our gatherings, and everyone who was in the know, knew that she was the “life” of our gatherings. But, in retrospect, we really didn’t know much about her. Not surprising—because she never said much about herself. 
>
> She would stare at you, and as I recall, she had “delighted” eyes, as if you were a celebrity, a star that was interviewed by her. And she’d ask you anything: “I saw you reading Plato’s Republic; Isn’t it hard? I always wondered what it was all about.” “When did you come to Canada; Isn’t English crazy?” “Wow, love your shoes! Where did you get them?”
And, it really didn’t matter what she asked, the conversation could go on for hours. No one ever yawned when she was around.  
>
> I think her “secret” may have been in her undivided attention to her audience, and not herself. She was the sort of investigative journalist who was obsessed with finding everything about whoever was in front of her —excepting that she was “digging” only for the most positive and the glorious. You’d always walk away with a new and deeper enlightening self-discovery that unifies your whole being.  
> 
> Perhaps the greatest conversationalists can tune-in to other people, and are genuinely and “supportively” interested in them. For the time of being while she was around, all of us felt like stars.
> [Reference](https://www.quora.com/How-should-I-talk-to-people-when-I-have-nothing-to-say-People-think-I-am-an-introvert-and-that%E2%80%99s-why-I-stay-quiet-and-withdrawn-However-I-think-I-just-have-nothing-to-talk-about-I-am-really-embarrassed-about-that-How-do-I-have-a-conversation)


---

**Find a common connection: a hobby or achievement or common friend of your own.** 



Breaking Small Talk (Networking Events, Dates, Meeting New People etc.) 


* https://blog.ted.com/9-ted-talks-to-inspire-smart-conversation/
* Sometimes small talk is good. E.g. Elevator Pitches for networking events, or where the engagement is formal. Break small talk only when you want to. 
* Throw out social scripts. (How are you? Your elevator pitch etc.) 
* Memories create an instant connection - When you see someone you know, instead of just saying, "Hey, how are you doing?" (which is pretty much what every single person will say to them), start off the conversation with a memory you experienced together.  For example, "Hey, remember that time when we all went out in Hollywood and ended up singing 'Hey Jude' at that dueling piano bar?  That was so fun!" I can almost guarantee you'll get a better reaction. 
* To start, ask an open ended question. “How is your day going?” “Are you having a good day?” What’s happening today? (Instead of What’s up?)
* Or Start anywhere. All starting points are equally valid. (‘Nice weather we’re having). Begin with what seems obvious. Once it is under way any task seems smaller. Trust your mind.  Edit and develop ideas *as* you speak. What is ordinary to you is often a revelation to others. (ARE - Anchor on something Common, Reveal about you, encourage with a question. 
* Ask other open ended questions:
    * "What are you interested in these days?
    * Tell me what fascinates you!
    * What's the funniest thing that's ever happened to you?" 
    * "What's a stupid thing that always makes you laugh?
    * Where all have you travelled? What place inspired you the most and why?
    * 36 Questions! http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/11/fashion/no-37-big-wedding-or-small.html?_r=0
* Infuse Humour. “We go way back”. “We were separated when we were young” “We planned all this”
* Start with your “firsts.” If you aren’t used to telling each other stories, it’s useful to have a few topics ready. Your first anything—date, kiss, dance, car, child, house—is a great place to start. The story of how you met can be particularly powerful and connecting, because it is, essentially, your origin story. And it’s always a happy memory. “Everything was pure then, nothing hurt yet,” Ms. Osborn says.
* Tell stories of the past, present and future. Highlighting great memories or successes that you had together in the past helps you reconnect. Narrating recent events that have happened to you, or telling a story about a challenge you are facing, helps illuminate what matters to you. Weaving a story of a future event as you’d like it to happen—a vacation, a child’s wedding, the dance at your 60th anniversary party—can help you visualize what you want for your relationship
* Literally say “let’s play the question game” where you get to ask each other any question and they have to respond (hint, this is a great and memorable thing to do on a first date).  Examples of good questions: what is something I don’t know about you?  What is something not many people know about you?  You said something about X the other (day/week/month), how is it?  Remember, this is a conversation.  You have to share too.
* For Dates: Hint at sex talk, but don't follow it up unless the other person shows a strong interest.
* Conversational Sparks. At the end of each topic or blurb, throw out a conversational spark. The purpose of the conversational spark is to...you guessed it, spark a further conversation. “...what do you guys think? Would you rather A or B?” “...If you got paid $1,000 would you do XYZ?” “... I can't believe they did that, what would you guys do in that situation?” …or you could just go in with the “Would you rather…?” game. Use with caution.  Would you rather : Have a good holiday which you remember, or a great holiday which you forget Artist or Happy Rich and Ugly, or Poor and Good looking
* Match their energy, then add 10%.
1 ) Inquire about their love life in a harmless way.  It lets their guard down and shows you’re willing to add humor into the conversation.
“Wow Greg. You look pretty dapper. Hot date tonight?”
“Dang Susan. Showing off the knees are ya? Who’s the lucky fella?”
2 ) Ask for their advice.  People want to help others and feel like they’re making a difference. Asking for their input will make them feel more valuable in the conversation while simultaneously stroking their ego.
“You know Greg, I’m supposed to plan a first date with this girl I really like but I’m afraid of screwing it up. Where do you like to take your dates?”
“Susan! That reminds me, do you have any nephews around the age of 7? It’s my nephews birthday next week and I haven’t a clue what to get him.”
3 ) Food. You’ll rarely find someone who can’t spout a Shakespearean-esque monologue about their favorite meals.
“I’m so hungry Greg. If I was being executed tonight, my last meal would be a full rack of BBQ ribs and a bucket of onion rings. What would you have?”
“Susan, I had the most fantabulous gelato the other day. Guava strawberry with a wafer on top. You lean more towards ice cream or yogurt?”
Note: I purposefully exaggerated the sensibilities of Susan and Greg. This isn’t indicative of how I think men vs women operate in the world. They’re just familiar archetypes I think many have experience with before.

     
Cold Approaching

Find a not-creepy way to be near her, close enough that two normal people might actually talk to each other without, you know, an ulterior motive. Talk to her about the kinds of things you might have in common with *any human* in that place and time. It can be virtually ANYTHING. Literally I'd rather have a total stranger say "Nice weather we're having" than walk over and say, in essence, they have judged this book by its cover and they want it for themselves. You don't even know if this is a textbook or a graphic novel, foo'!  Here are some other ideas to get you started (note that questions have higher response rates than non-questions): 
- In a coffee shop: "Hey, do you see any outlets over there?"
- In a music store: "Wow, I can't believe places like this still exist! I feel like I should buy something just so I can tell my children about the experience someday. Any recommendations in [genre she is perusing]?"
- Anywhere in New York City: "Wow, by the time they finally take this scaffolding down, nobody's going to be able to recognize this block."

Asking for directions, the time, or whether she thinks it might rain are all acceptable. When she answers you can follow up with relatable commentary ("Wow, I hope I find that place in time for my meeting!" "Oh, man, my boss is not going to love it when I show up looking ready for a wet t-shirt contest thanks to this busted umbrella.")

Just remember, relatability is essential. A wee bit of vulnerability is often very relatable (note the nervousness conveyed in the above examples)--maybe watch Brene Brown's famous TED talk for more on that. (Also, if you're in the market for smart women, many of them will like that you know Brene Brown and her work.)Interestingly, it is often the confident who are willing to talk about the things that make them a bit nervous--and confidence is a very attractive trait.  (But arrogance or self-aggrandizement is a huge turnoff so I'm emphasizing relatability here.) 

Bonus points for humor, of course. Often things are funny because they are relatable.

Then follow up with more words when she responds--this is a thing called "conversation" and it's how humans connect. Then after a few lines, put out your hand for a handshake and say, "I'm Todd, by the way" or whatever your name is. In other words, be normal. 

Then keep talking and try to make the conversation awesomer, to a sufficient level of awesome that you can plausibly say (and she might plausibly agree) something about how awesome and fun it is to talk to her and that you should continue talking later. Humor in this phase is really helpful.  

Note: If it's a really great conversation, she may be interested in meeting you again **even if she's not romantically available to you.** So IF, later in the conversation when you ask her to meet you and talk more, you want her to say no if she's not interested in you as a potential romantic partner, now is a good time to compliment a single aspect of her appearance. This will convey in a non-creepy way some level of romantic interest from you. Here's how:

Complimenting her coat, a statement necklace, or her great shoes--anything it looks like she deliberately chose and maybe expresses her style--is a good and subtle choice. (Complimenting ratty sweatpants will come across as either sarcastic or trying too hard.)  That might be a line of conversation--where she found the item or whether those shoes are comfortable. Note that "statement pieces" like a really note-worthy or eye-catching or unusual jacket or accessory are called "statement" for a reason: they are worthy of conversation and she will likely be open to talking about them. You will get to know if she loves vintage or got it from her grandmother or wears this jacket to all her interviews or bought this scarf because it doubles as a picnic blanket in a pinch.

Complimenting her hair or eyes is a very clear communication of romantic intent but you have to give her time to say thanks and then move on quickly; it's not a comfortable line of conversation. ("I love your eyes, where did you get them?" "Umm, God/my mom/I made them myself"... NO. Awkward. Don't make her feel awkward.)

Eventually, you wanna wrap things up. If it starts to get awkward, wrap it up quickly! It's better to have a very brief conversation that is great than a longer conversation that is 20% awkward (any amount of awkward expands to fill the space--unless it's you personally feeling awkward and you can turn it around to be funny and relatable.)

It's often helpful and shows that you didn't have an ultimatum but you *do* have a life if you "have to run."  And then you can say, for example, "I'd love to keep talking but I have to run. Maybe you can meet for lunch?" And her answer will tell you how much she is interested or able to meet up with you again.  "Later" can even be "now" if the situation is such that you could say, for example, "I was just on my way to grab a coffee--care to join me?"  

Many times, especially with a beautiful woman who gets chatted up all the time, the answer will still be no. She's taken, or she's busy, or she's just not that into you. BUT. If you have a chance at all of getting with her, this is the best way of getting from "two complete strangers who happen to be in the same place at the same time" to "two complete strangers who are getting to know each other more and from that point anything could happen."

While Travelling:

How to break the ice then? Dr. Epley suggests simply saying to that stranger on the bus or in the cafe: “Hi, I’m visiting. Can you tell me what I ought to see in town?” 
“Everybody loves to brag about their city,” he said.
Or offer a compliment, he suggested. “As experienced solo travelers know, opportunities for pleasurable connections are everywhere: trains, planes, parks, bars, museums, walking tours, group hikes. Yet should all that fail, technology provides seemingly innumerable ways to increase the odds. 



---


**Good Practice: Introduce other people**



Soon as you meet one person, introduce that person to the next person—and add in a playful, "Hey, have you met so-and-so?  We go way back.” 

Awesome introductions - When you introduce someone, don't just introduce them by name. Tell a story about them and praise them. People will love you for this and it creates a natural flow into a longer conversation. 

----

**Situation:  Run out of things to say? Awkward conversation.**
Do Word association. Person talking about their trip to Costa Rica? What do you think of when you think of Costa Rica? Beach? Tan? Surfing? Beer? Palm trees? That one time your friend went and something crazy happened. The more you do this, the better you’ll get at it. You’ll be able to talk and think of witty things to say on the spot for any situation. It takes practice in the beginning, but is a useful way to never have an awkward silence again. 

---


**Good practice: Care about names**

- People will connect with you much better if you show that they're important to you. One of the best ways to do this is to remember their names. How? 
	- Repeat someone's name right after they introduce themselves to me. 
	- Think of a celebrity that has the same name so that it helps my memory by association. 
- But You don’t care about someone’s name, you care about how the interaction goes and how they make you feel.
	-  I’ve had so many sales people trying to build comfort with me by mentioning my name every 10 seconds after I introduced myself it actually becomes unpleasant, I know where this is going. A close friend would not say my name 10 times per minute. 
	-  What I do instead if I really see I actually click with a person and realize I totally forgot their name, I just ask them to say my name again. 
	-  “Do you remember my name? You will notice that 3/4 times they would have also forgotten and then you just polarize and laugh, “Haha It’s fine I also forgot, let’s introduce ourselves again”. It takes the pressure of your shoulders and makes you more relaxed. If they actually remember, just say ”I totally forgot your name, I didn’t think we would be talking such interesting things, what was it again?” while smiling 

---


**Good practice: Always take another person with you when you go to get food.**

At least stand around two/three person when you eat even if you don't talk to them. Try to eat before a party because otherwise you wouldn't be able to talk to people and you don't want to be seen stuffing food into your mouth all the time. Also, don't move your hands much when you are in a group conversation.

---


**Good practice: In a group conversation, look at the person for a while before you want to address someone.** It redirects the focus of the group to that person and makes them feel like they are the center of attention. In general you can control the group conversation easily by this technique. Just remember to give everyone their fair share of attention.


---


**Situation: I don't remember/know their name but it's too late to ask**

Introduce them to someone else. Call over your friend Steve, turn back to the person you were speaking to and say, "This is my friend Steve." Pause. The other person will reveal his/her name to Steve and you will hear it. If you don't have a friend named Steve, a friend with another name can also work. In a pinch, you can use a waitress with a nametag.

---

**Situation: I don't want to kill the conversation's momentum but I don't really have anything to contribute**

Use the parrot technique if you want to keep them going. Pick a keyword/phrase and simply repeat it back with kind of an inquisitive tone. Sounds far too simple to work, but it totally works:

- [You, thinking... "What are we talking about again?"]
- Them: "...so what nobody told her was that you need to turn the knob to change the size of the grind."
- You: "The size of the grind?"
- Them: "Yeah, there's this knob that makes it either more fine or more coarse, depending on what you're using to brew."
- You: "What you're using?"
- Them: "Right, like if it's a moka pot or a French press or filter coffee or whatever."
- You: [OHH We're talking about coffee!] "So... Moka pot, French press, filter coffee..."
- Them: "Cause they're all different, right? So like I like a fuller-body so I use a coarse grind with a moka pot but you can use whatever."
- You: [Okay, now I have something to say] "I mostly drink lattes. The milk is rich in protein."

----

**Elocution**


Keep hands away from your face or head. NO UNNECESSARY MOVEMENTS OR TWITCHING. speak with a still head. (also Longer Ers and Umms, not short era..
REMOVE LIKES AND UMMS, USE BETTER WORDS, SPEAK SLOWLY.  PAUSE. Reduce filler words: "um, uh, like, just". Make friends with pauses in between sentences and learn to be comfortable in short moments of silence. I remember reading a research study that suggests filler words are a way for our brains to scan for the right words, thus I'm not arbitrarily saying that filler words are "bad". However, using the same line of thinking, reducing filler words suggests you have a good command of the vocabulary you want to best communicate your ideas.

Speak authoritatively, with certainty. Confidence is more important than consistency or correctness. Portray Confidence and Self-Assurance - Give people the impression that you're 100% sure of yourself, you're an authority in the subject matter you're talking about, and you believe wholeheartedly in what you're saying. Many people are disproportionately attracted to this quality even if it's specious. The impression of doubt and self-restraint tend to repel many people even when that's grounded on reasonable premises. Speak in complete sentences. Don’t speak in halting, incomplete sentences. Trailing off, editing your sentences as you got.  If others interrupt, keep talking. Demonstrate conviction. Boldly (don’t qualify) Other people don’t know of your own critique! 
    * Place a pencil in between your teeth - right to the end of your mouth and tighten your jaw grip on it. And then for the next 15 minutes speak loudly, clearly and enunciate your words to the best of your ability. Or read from a book - really loudly and clearly.Keep doing this for 15 minutes non-stop. As you do this, your lips, your jaw, your tongue and your cheeks will be sore. Really sore. However, once you take it out - you will be shocked to see how well you articulate every single word.Try this everyday for 15 minutes and you will never be the same speaker ever again 


---


**Situation: How to shake hands**

Someone else said something to the effect of "Turn your hand over so your palm is facing down. That shows dominance." Okay sure, but do you always want to show dominance? Is it ALL ALPHA ALL THE TIME with you? If so, you might be a jerk.
You should be able to divide the people with whom you shake hands into three rough categories:

- Shy people should be offered the hand palm-up. You're showing them that you're not threatening, and you aren't going to impose your ego on them the whole time you're together. There's no squeeze here-- Just a gentle cup, like you're holding a palmful of water. You're also extending your arm far away from your body, somewhat unbalancing yourself for their sake-- If this was judo, you would be pretty much opening yourself up for a big throw. You're saying, "Here, let me leave my comfort zone so you don't have to." I have a friend who brings dates to group events alot. His dates don't know anyone else there, so they're almost always uncomfortable and shy. This is how I shake their hands.
- Moderate people should be given what I call the car key maneuver. You start with a slight palm-up tilt and turn to a vertical-to-slight palm down tilt. You're pretty much just meeting them in the middle here. Most handshakes fall into this category. Don't overthink it. 
- Truly aggressive, arm-wrenching, hand-crushing people should be dealt with in one of two ways: 
	- Show that brute that you aren't to be bullied! As you clasp the hand, focus on reaching your fingers as deeply toward the wrist as you firmly hook the thumb with yours. This prevents your fingers from getting crushed. Keep your elbow close to your body to maintain strength and force him to step in. You ready? Cause it's GO TIME! Twist his wrist until your palm is FLAT or his wrist pops off, pull your arm in closer to your body so he loses his balance, and STARE HIM STRAIGHT IN THE EYES UNTIL HE LOOKS AWAY! He will respect you more if you literally judo throw him. 
	-  Avoid the alpha-dog contest altogether and go for a fist bump. The greatest general is the one who never engages in open combat. 

---

**Pausing and emphasizing**

Some people never stop talking. They go on a spree once they engage someone, talking a lot and jumping from topic to topic without letting the actual person contribute. This denotes low value. Now imagine I say the following 2 sentences, which one do you think packs a bigger punch? 

- “Make sure you write everyday and that will make all the difference” 
- “Make sure you write everyday… (look in the eyes with 3 seconds silence) and that will make all the difference” 

----



**On Making Friends**



- Proximity (due to factors like convenience, the mere exposure effect, the odds of ever actually meeting each other, etc.)
- Repeated, unplanned interactions (like at school, day care, play dates, extracurricular activities, church, parents' friends' kids, etc.)
- A setting that allows or encourages people to open up and confide in each other.

Doing things to fit in, doing things to seem cool, eats at your self-esteem. (Learn to say no. Most of us want to be loved, approved of, fit in, popular and so on. Unfortunately this also means saying a lot of yes when you really don't want to for fear of offending others. I am not a baseball fan, but there is this expression in baseball called the "fat pitch". It basically means as a batter you don't swing at every pitch that is coming at you, you patiently wait for the statistically high probability pitch because you only have limited chances at swinging. You need to think life and business the same way. There are too many distractions and low quality encounters, you cannot partake in all of them, otherwise you will be dragged down. Constantly ask yourself if what you are about to spend your time on actually help you advance your cause, if not, why are you doing it? I have trained my sales staff to fire customers, yes, fire customers. If the customer isn't economically viable for us to service, we are doing them a disservice by hanging on. We would certainly not able to run a business in a sustainable manner either. With people it is the same, you want to get ahead, then spend time with quality individuals, do not tolerate mediocrity. If you find yourself the lowest caliber person in the group, that would be fantastic!)
 
This happens slowly and gradually over the normal days of your lives, not just on one or two crazy nights.
Instead of going out to drink with people you want to impress, Whatever you do, choose one person you are close with, get some wine or chocolate, or blunts, whatever, and go at it.  Or  Cook a dinner for close friends (with wine) Small dinner parties give are 80% of the things I look forward to in life (especially, or should I say even, as a 22 year old).  Again, spending quality time with people you care about, for me, is much more fun than going to try and meet a lot of people in a loud dark place where are the girls are getting hit on and all the guys are blank-faced andno one actually wants to talk to you.  In fact, everyone is looking around the room all of the time to see what else is more interesting.  Small dinner parties essentially affirm your humanity.  It is a reunion of people that you care about (hopefully), or want to know more about, and provides for a much more fun night than trying to meet new people.

Go out, drink a lot if you want, and have as much fun as possible with friends (without caring what others think)
Essentially, go out.  But go out with the mentality that you are going to have as much fun as possible tonight.  Make sure your friends are on board.  If you are having more fun than anyone in a given place, people will try to meet you.  Your night will be a lot more fun because your homework assignment is literally to have fun.  Things will be funnier.  You will smile more.  You will dance, hopefully.  You might play whatever game there is at the bar, joke with the bartender, be that really fun/funny new person that someone else gets to meet. 

Have a mind-blowing conversation with a friend
Ideally this is the friend from idea number one.  Someone you are close with.  Make this person your best friend for the night.  Spill your guts.  Get them involved.  Emotions.  Crazy emotions.  What scares you.  What used to scare you.  What do you want that no one else knows?  Play the question game.  Literally say “let’s play the question game” where you get to ask each other any question and they have to respond (hint, this is a great and memorable thing to do on a first date).  Examples of good questions: what is something I don’t know about you?  What is something not many people know about you?  You said something about X the other (day/week/month), how is it?  Remember, this is a conversation.  You have to share too.

Watch a good movie (or standup comedy) with someone you care about
I love movies.  I love standup comedy.  I love friends.  Actually, I would never watch a movie by myself.  I save it to watch with someone else.  I hate watching movies by myself.  I’d rather read a book.  Sharing an experience this way both allows you to appreciate the movie more and build your relationship with the other person.  In fact, if you spend any time of high emotion with a person, even if that emotion isn’t related to your relationship together, you are likely to grow even closer.
 
Get together a bunch of people and play poker
Preferably a bunch of townie high school friends that you haven’t talked to in five years.  You know what I mean.  Catch up with people that you kind of used to hang around or even your old good friends.  Shoot the shit.  How are your lives going now? What are you all trying to do?  Remember the time that we almost went to jail?  Yeah that was crazy.  And Bucky had us all smoking black and milds for a few months before we realized it was really stupid.  Yeah.  Wow.  We were young.  Four years ago

Call someone you haven’t talked to in a long time and say thank you 
Catching up with people makes us feel good.  If you feel lonely, call someone you haven’t called in a long time.  Someone you haven’t talked to.  They may think you’re crazy for having called them, but that doesn’t matter.  They probably won’t.  They’ll probably be flattered.  If they can’t talk then, schedule another time to talk to them.  Or you can write someone a letter or long email.  I love sending letters and long emails.  I’m about to do one right now.

Have a medium sized party with only people you like
I mean 25-40 people.  Hopefully you have a backyard or something.  Over this number things get crazy, and if you like crazy, more power to you.  I like things at this level.  I like being able to socialize with everyone completely comfortably.  I like introducing people to each other.  I like gathering up in a big circle around a fire with some beer with old and new friends, and friends of friends.  This beats crazy parties for me.  

Go Dancing/Kareoke-ing with friends
Go nuts.  Pretend no one is looking when you dance.  They’ll look.  Pretend no one is looking when you sing.  They’ll look.  You’ll meet people very easily.  You’ll feel really, really good and you won’t know why.  Maybe it is all that time that you spent smiling.    

Spend time with friends.  When people go out, a lot of the emotionally draining time that they spend "out", they try to meet other people.  Meet other people during the day, doing activities you like to do besides drink and talk loud.  Spend time with your friends, with your loved ones.  Do things that you want to do.  Don’t eat ass.  I meant kiss ass.  Watch standup comedy.  You’ll be a funnier person 

For Finding Women: Go to dance classes or traveller hostels

- [Making friends as an adult](http://www.thehappytalent.com/blog/behold-the-number-one-best-way-to-make-new-friends-as-an-adult)
- [How can I speak with more clarity?](https://www.quora.com/How-can-I-speak-with-more-clarity)
- [Mirroring, Jargon, Hifalutin Words by Alan Alda](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6ZzWArYi5Yc)
- [How to become insanely well connected](http://firstround.com/review/how-to-become-insanely-well-connected/)
- [Mirror/Paraphrase + let them do small favours](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=18793385)
- [Smart Conversation Ted Talks](https://blog.ted.com/9-ted-talks-to-inspire-smart-conversation/?utm_campaign=social&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=facebook.com&utm_content=ted-blog&utm_term=humanities)
- [How to talk to strangers](https://ideas.ted.com/how-to-talk-to-strangers/?utm_campaign=social&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=facebook.com&utm_content=ideas-blog&utm_term=humanities)
- [How do I develop strong presence and personality?](https://www.quora.com/How-do-I-develop-a-strong-presence-and-personality)
- [How to speak for yourself](https://www.ted.com/talks/adam_galinsky_how_to_speak_up_for_yourself)
- [Beyond formal conversations](https://yourstory.com/2017/10/conversations-beyond-formal-communication/?utm_source=FB&utm_medium=Bst)