---

layout: post-journal
title:  Don't improve yourself
date:   2019-03-21 09:00:11
tag: 
categories: journal
excerpt: 
permalink: /joy
comments: false

---


Most nice guys' "niceness" is not niceness at all. Instead, it's mostly submissive, approval-seeking, low-status behavior. That kind of behavior elicits instinctive disgust from women. The fact that women hate feeling disgust towards nice guys who did nothing wrong — and whose only sin is being clueless and socially inept — only makes it worse. As if eliciting disgust weren't bad enough, eliciting guilt and anger really makes the experience potentially very unpleasant for women.

Niceness is only valuable when it comes from a position of strength and high-status. The problem is that most nice guys have no idea whatsoever how to project high status. Nice guys read the words "high status" and think it has something to do with expensive cars and high-paying jobs. Human instincts evolved over tens of thousands of years, mostly in primitive hunter-gatherer societies that lacked status toys.

So, what is status? How can one project high status? Quoting British playwright Keith Johnstone, the pioneer of improvisational theater:

> Suddenly we understood that every inflection and movement implies a status, and that no action is due to chance, or really "motiveless". It was hysterically funny, but at the same time very alarming. All our secret manoeuvrings were exposed. If someone asked a question we didn't bother to answer it, we concentrated on why it had been asked. No one could make an "innocuous" remark without everyone instantly grasping what lay behind it. Normally we are "forbidden" to see status transactions except when there's a conflict. In reality status transactions continue all the time. In the park we'll notice the ducks squabbling, but not how carefully they keep their distances when they are not.

[...]

> A comedian is someone who is paid to lower his own or other people's status. 

[...] 

> We want people to be very low-status, but we don't want to feel sympathy for them—slaves are always supposed to sing at their work.

[...]

> When a very high-status person is wiped out, everyone feels pleasure as they experience the feeling of moving up a step. This is why tragedy has always been concerned with kings and princes, and why we have a special high-status style for playing tragedy. [...] Tragedy is obviously related to sacrifice. Two things strike me about reports of sacrifices: one is that the crowd get more and more tense, and then are relaxed and happy at the moment of death; the other is that the victim is raised in status before being sacrificed. The best goat is chosen, and it's groomed, and magnificently decorated. A human sacrifice might be pampered for months, and then dressed in fine clothes, and rehearsed in his role at the centre of the great ceremony. Elements of this can be seen in the Christ story (the robe, the crown of thorns, and even the eating of the "body"). A sacrifice has to be endowed with high status or the magic doesn't work.

> Social animals have inbuilt rules which prevent them killing each other for food, mates, and so on. Such animals confront each other, and sometimes fight, until a hierarchy is established, after which there is no fighting unless an attempt is being made to change the "pecking order".

[...]

> In animals the pattern of eye contacts often establishes dominance. A stare is often interpreted as an aggressive act—hence the dangers of looking at gorillas through binoculars. Visitors to zoos feel dominant when they can outstare the animals. I suggest you try the opposite with zoo animals: break eye contact and then glance back for a moment. Polar bears may suddenly see you as "food". Owls cheer up perceptibly.

[...]

> It's only to be expected that status is established not by staring, but by the reaction to staring. Thus dark glasses raise status because we can't see the submission of the eyes.

[...]

> My belief (at this moment) is that people have a preferred status; that they like to be low, or high, and that they try to manoeuvre themselves into the preferred positions. A person who plays high status is saying "Don't come near me, I bite." Someone who plays low status is saying "Don't bite me, I'm not worth the trouble." In either case the status is a defence, and it'll usually work. It's very likely that you will increasingly be conditioned into playing the status that you've found an effective defence. You become a status specialist, very good at playing one status, but not very happy or competent at playing the other. Asked to play the "wrong" status, you'll feel "undefended".

> Source: Keith Johnstone, Impro: Improvisation and the Theatre.


One should be polite and courteous to all. One creates the perception of high status by establishing boundaries and policing them. Body language and stare create 90+% of the perception.
"a genuine 'high-status' guy being nice/kind/gentle"
Status is environment-dependent. A high-status man in one social circle can be a low-status man in another. A beautiful 16-year-old girl will be high-status in her high school, but average-to-low status in a modeling competition.
"women are attracted to guys who are being fakely authoritative/dominant  over others, the relationship arising out of this attraction isn't going  to be harmonious in the long run"
You assume that the man will use the same tricks as the relationship evolves, which isn't true. Assertiveness creates interest in women and establishes high-status. The man becomes visible. Then the man must be shrewd and allow the woman to "hunt" him. He must engineer the perception that she is conquering him step by step, which enormously pleases the woman. If he surrenders too early, tells her he loves her, and submits, she loses interest because he lowered his status too much. The hunt was too easy.
The way it works is that women instinctively test a man to see how mentally strong and socially savvy he is. If he fails the test, that is, if he's nice instead of firm, she will lose a bit of respect for him. At some point, after many failed tests, she will have no respect left for him.

Women certainly want niceness, reliability and loyalty from the men they marry. But to get to the point where they are ready to marry a man, he must prove his value to her first, and to do that he must be firm instead of nice when she tests him. The problem with nice guys is that they're nice when they shouldn't. Niceness should always be conditional. If she's behaving in a way that you disapprove of, you must assertively tell her to behave, like a father would to his child. If you don't, if you tolerate her bad behavior, you will not get to a point where she's ready to commit to you. Interpret a woman's test as a request "teach me to respect you, please". Don't take it personally. If she's testing you, she has at least some interest in you.

Women usually divorce their husbands when they can no longer respect them and tolerate their submissive behavior. He fails all her tests. He is too easy to control and manipulate. He offers no resistance to her mental games. He's boring!! Worst of all, he doesn't even realize that there are games being played.

Women are hunters, too. But women hunt in the psychological and emotional worlds, rather than in the physical world. Generally speaking, a woman wants the hunt to be fun, which means that the prey should not make it too easy for her. The problem is that most men don't know how to make it not-easy for a woman, thus ruining her hunt. 

For a woman, the greatest pleasure is to find a good-looking, intelligent man with a good career and seduce him. But she does not want to seduce him only with her looks, because she knows her looks will fade. She wants to capture the man with her charm, which she considers unique (all women think they're unique). Why? Because if she captures him with her charm, then once she loses her beauty, her man will still be interested in her. It's a much more stable situation, as much more energy is required to break the bond.

Hence, men should be very careful when praising a beautiful woman's beauty. She already knows she's beautiful. It's wiser to praise her intelligence (assuming she has some).

A man who praises a beautiful woman's beauty too soon is announcing to her that he's easy prey and that it would be boring for her to "hunt" him. She loses interest in him.

A man who shows some contempt towards a woman's beauty is telling her that he's not easy prey and that she must offer more than only looks to capture him. He projects high status, as a man who treats beautiful women with contempt must have lots of experience with them, and must thus be "special". She must earn his affection with actual work and charm, not merely with her looks.

Most of this female behavior is instinctive. There is no point in complaining about it, because Mother Nature made women that way.

One should be polite and courteous to all. But one should also establish boundaries and police them aggressively. Nice guys allow women to cross boundaries all the time. Moreover, trying to please a woman you barely know, trying to make her like you, is low-status behavior. One can be polite without playing low-status. Think of chivalry. Chivalry was invented when knights had enormous power over peasants. Chivalry is essentially the set of actions that allow a knight to lower his status to raise the status of the peasants.

Chivalry is dead because most men are low-status in women's eyes. Lowering one's status puts one in an even worse position.

To be liked, one should always bring oneself a bit closer to the average status of the social circle one's in. If you're the highest-status member, play low-status. If you're lowest-status member, play high-status. 

The "be yourself" platitude is suicidal. You can't talk to your boss and your best friend the same way. You always have to wear a different mask when talking to different people. Your body languages changes, the pitch of your voice also changes.




----

**Playing High Status**

[Oliver Reed](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OmnK0ty0RBE)

* If you don't want to talk about something, let people know it firmly.
* Never shout. Never boast - just let your importance be quietly obvious. Don't praise yourself, unless you are obviously joking. Let the other party praise you. If the other party is consistently praising you, reciprocate, but try to divert the attention to other things that might be more interesting. It's possible that the other party is praising you because they feel a lack of power. You should lower your status in this case. • Don't humble brag, ever.
* Johnstone doesn’t mention  that the status isn’t just in the words you say, or your position in society, but also in the body language. One can think of it as three dimensional. All 3 together don’t go well, whereas 2 out of 3 is a good recipe. Though body language should always be high, i feel.
* Ask to play the wrong status, I’d feel undefended, because I have become comfortable with low status
* A "high-status specialist" conveys in every word and gesture, "Don't come near me, I bite.”
* Perfect Calm and Sense of Security - No caring about other people think.
* Don’t let your your body be vulnerable, exposing your neck and torso to the other person.When walking, don’t move  out of other people's path.
* For authority or high status, speak with a still head. (also Longer Ers and Umms, not short era. )
* Make decisions for a group; take responsibility. Come up with hypothesis.
* Being surrounded by an entourage, especially of people who are physically smaller than you.
* NO TALKING ABOUT YOUR OWN DISCOMFITURES. ‘Low status players save up little tit-bits involving their own discomfiture with which to amuse and placate other people’. Self deprecatory humour has to be with high body language and something which is very ordinary human condition kind of thing.
* Lower status for those who play high status complusively! (give unsolicited advice, correct, contradict, approve or disapprove, tell them what to do, • Ignore what they said and talk about something else, especially when they've said something that requires an answer. E.g. "Have you seen my socks?" "The train leaves in five minutes.”, one-up, . Ignore what they said and talk about something else, especially when they've said something that requires an answer. E.g. "Have you seen my socks?" "The train leaves in five minutes, win (avoid situation where you’ll lose, announce something good about you, disregard their opinion, talk sarcastically, make them wait, tease)
* Raise status for those who play low status complusively (ask permission, opinion, advice or help, show gratitude, address with a fancy title)
* When you see and interact with a high-status person, you want their attention very badly. That feeling is both excitatory and inhibitory. What I mean is that at the same time that you feel you want their attention and their praise, you also will feel like you need to strongly regulate your own behavior. You can see this if you've ever observed an audience quiet down when the speaker enters: each person's brain is sending them a signal that they should pay attention and stop moving. That's what's making you feel paralyzed. You feel paralyzed because your brain is actually paralyzing you, and that's totally normal.
* Downplaying compliments isn’t being charmingly modest, it’s actually blocking (hostile). Downplaying a compliment sends a message to your admirer that they were wrong to compliment you. Stop, absorb the compliment, let that show on your face, and thank them instead.
* Use Conversation Fillers (Yah, Right)
* Having no visible reaction to what the other person said. (Imagine saying something to a typical Clint Eastwood character. You say something expecting a reaction, and you get--nothing.)
* Don’t check the other person for a reaction to what you said.
* Evaluate other people's work.
* Talking matter-of-factly about things that the other person finds displeasing or offensive. Don’t dance around your words (beating around the bush) when talking about something that will displease the other person.
*  One can protect the status by circumlocution. People can keep blocking each other (by shifting about self e.g.)  yet at the same time appear friendly.  ‘I don’t know what X meant, but …’ vs ‘Did you mean that?’
* Giving or withholding permission.Don’t ask for permission before you can act.
* Looking at the other person with your eyes somewhat down (head tilted back a bit to make this work), creating the feeling that you are a parent talking to a child. Don’t Look up toward the other person (head tilted forward a bit to make this work), creating the feeling that you are a child talking to a parent.
* Give unsolicited advice. Tell them what to do.
* One-up them. E.g. have a worse problem than the one they described, have a greater past achievement than theirs, have met a more famous celebrity, earn more money, do better than them at something they're good at, etc.
* Laugh at them. (Not with them.)
* Speaking cryptically, not adjusting your speech to be easily understood by the other person (except that mumbling does not count). E.g. saying, "Chomper not right" with no explanation of what you mean or what you want the other person to do. Don’t adjust the way you say something to help the other person understand; meeting the other person on their (cognitive) ground; explaining yourself. E.g. "Could you please adjust the chomper? That's the gadget on the kitchen counter immediately to the left of the toaster. If you just give it a slight rap on the top, that should adjust it." 

----




[How can I develop self-confidence and self-esteem? by Ellen Vrana](https://www.quora.com/How-can-I-develop-self-confidence-and-self-esteem/answer/Ellen-Vrana)

Confidence does not lie in achievements, looks or skills. Not real confidence.
There is a difference between;
1) confidence with a qualifier, e.g.,  I’m confident in my looks, I’m confident in my intelligence…etc; and
2) Overall confidence in one’s self, i.e. I’m confident in me. (aka self-esteem).

The former is specific to achievements, looks or skills that come naturally or through work. You can grow to feel confident in them, sure.  But if that is all you do, you might only be confident as long as those things hold up.  In this case your confidence is tied to that thing only, not to you.  That’s not sustainable.  

The latter is a more fundamental feeling of self-trust: no matter what life throws at you, you can handle it – kind of feeling.  
And contrary to most answers here, I think overall confidence is not simply the summation of qualified confidences.  You might be the most beautiful person in the world AND smart, but that doesn’t mean you will be confident in your self.  I think enough premature celebrity suicides have shown us that.  It has to come from another place.

The reverse, however, is true.  By building your overall confidence, it will overflow and boost confidence in other areas. It’s kinda like saying, “I don’t know how to fish, but I trust myself to figure it out.” Or, “I don’t know if that woman is going to accept my date offer but I’ll survive if she doesn’t.”   Confident people aren’t more sure about a positive result, they are just not as afraid of failure.  

This is because their sense of self isn’t tied to achievements, skills, or looks. Which leads me to my next point.

How do you improve your overall confidence?  Good question. 

In my personal experience, integrity has been the main driver of real confidence. Integrity embodies compassion, generosity of spirit, honesty, reciprocal actions.  It means treating people kindly, helping others, thinking about the world around you. You can put yourself through almost anything as long as at the end of the day, you can say: I did the right thing and in so doing, I did right by others.

This is how you start to get confidence in yourself, practice integrity. If you have nothing else, have that.  If you do, you’re already better than most.



The first type of confidence is grown by surrounding yourself with shiny things. If we take that you have nothing. That’s why some people work really hard to make sure no one takes those things away. The second one is grown by actually going through the experiences mentioned above and making you understand that they are phases, that everyone is flawed and that in order to make some diamonds you have to squeeze some rocks under high pressure.
Let’s look at our two protagonists. Both are super spies. Both save the world. But one seems like a buffoon and the other one seems so mysterious and manly. And here is where your problems start:
You try to copy the image of the cool guy without ever risking being a buffoon.
And of course, why should you? When everywhere around the social media you hear about these people that just seem to have been amazing by default.


You are too busy adding shiny things around yourself aka “the perfectly tailored clothes, the perfect walk, the perfect voice, the perfect gaze, the perfect answer, the perfect comeback, the perfect advice, the perfect body, the perfect job, the perfect car” instead of focusing on trying something new, exploring, making mistakes and allowing yourself to fail, over and over again until “Embarrassment” becomes your middle name and you finally find out what works for you and who you are.

I talked with a friend recently who told me the following: “I hate those awkward silence breaks you have in the middle of the conversations and you just don’t know what to do or say, you want to run away before it gets, even more, uncomfortable.” Then he continued: “I wish I was more like James Bond. Have you seen how he holds his stance when he talks, how he pierces people’s eyes, how he always knows how to lead with the wittiest arguments and answers?”
This is exactly what is stopping you from being great. When you hit a certain critical moment you overthink everything x10 times. “What should I say. How can I impress? What is the most charming thing I could say? How can I give a really smart answer?”. There is always a pressure to be someone you are not, yet. You ask yourself how can you be more like James Bond when in reality you should ask how can you be more natural like Austin Powers, risk being a buffoon but actually building you into an interesting individual based on the experiences you lived instead of being perceived as perfect by social pressure.
If you allow yourself to be proven wrong, you will learn. If you allow yourself to be rejected, you will improve. If you allow yourself to goof around once in a while, you will relieve stress. If you allow yourself to make mistakes, you will grow. If you put yourself out there through the awkward conversations, the silent moments, the failed projects, the broken hearts, the job rejections, you will reach where you need to be.
You might not be the most popular kid on the block, but the quality of people you will finally end up with will be invaluable.
The coolest thing about Austin Powers is that he seems to live in his own bubble. With the ladies, he acts like he is the world’s most attractive man. Even if he doesn’t know how to use a gadget he acts like he invented it, eventually blowing something up by mistake. While being captured by his villains he always seems to have a hidden backup plan in the silliest situations.
However ridiculous he might be, he does one key thing:
He does not dis-empower himself, never.
Be weird, be different, be yourself.
There is a quote from Dale Carnegie’s book called “How to Stop Worrying and Start Living” that I really love:
“Two men looked out from prison bars,
One saw the mud, the other saw stars.”
One sees only where he is, the other sees where he could be. In order to reach the stars, sometimes you need to crawl through the mud.
I would use the same comparison to ask you this:
Which superspy do you do you want to be?
The poster boy or the squeezed rock?


-----


I have always become friends with people who I want to like me.  And.  I want people who convey ambiguous emotions towards me to like me.  I try to get the attention of people who I want to like me.  And you know what?  This is even more prevalent if people don’t immediately like me.  I want people that don’t outwardly like me to like me.  Changing people’s unclear, possibly negative opinions about me to undoubtedly positive is a stressful game that I impose on myself and have unconsciously done since I was six years old.  

It sucks.  It really sucks.  And it still happens to me everyday.  Only recently have I been very conscious of it.  

It doesn’t let you appreciate the people who like you.  If you’re anything like me, you spend a lot of physical and mental energy trying to get people to like you.  You focus on these people and not your friends and family and everyone else.  You feel anxious and nervous when you are around this person and for some reason you can’t act like yourself.   This happens with guys that I respect and wanted to impress, usually in a large group of people, and with girls that I particularly like.  In fact, the more that I am helplessly crushing on a girl and the longer the situation remains ambiguous, I might even become more awkward on a fourth or fifth date than I was on the first.  How’s that for choking?   The trick for this ubiquitous and very normal problem isn’t in getting more confident.  It’s not in getting better conversational skills or becoming more likable or acting friendlier.  I swear it’s not.  

In fact, over the last six months of my life I have basically figured out how to beat this thing. Well, maybe tame it would be a better phrase.  Because it takes practice, and if you don’t practice, these thoughts about all of the people who hate you or may or may not like you start to creep back into your head.  So bear in mind that all of this is a practice that builds on itself.  

Firstly, you need to know that you are seeing yourself through the lens of other people.  We all do this to a certain degree.  “What would so-and-so think of me if I did this”?  The people that you think of when you ask yourself this question are the gatekeepers of your life.  The thing is, they are more pervasive in your thoughts than in real life (you have to interact with their opinion even when they aren’t there).  Historically, for me, these have been people close to me that I may be embarrassed to share close experiences with.  I wanted to maintain an image of myself through their eyes that I thought that they thought I had.

I’m exhausted simply writing that sentence.  

The key to this first step is to start super-charging your thoughts to only think about yourself.  I mean this in the most un-selfish and possibly the most selfish way possible.  When you find yourself asking yourself questions like “what would so and so think of me if I do this?” try to think instead “what would I think of myselfif I did or didn’t do this?”  By acclimating yourself to think about you as yourself instead of as other people, you start to focus more on yourself.  It helps to keep a notepad throughout the day to write down instances in which you acted out of seeing yourself as you want others to see you, as well as writing down things you wish you did.  The more time you spend reflecting on what you want and the more you write it down, the more likely you will be aware of who you are doing the things you are doing for.  

The second thing – and maybe the most important.  You need to love yourself. (Just a quick note, I stole this from Kamal Ravikant even though I have never read his book.  Thanks dude!) By default I can tell you right now that you are trying to get the approval and validation of someone so that you can feel better about yourself.  Let’s look at that sentence again.  

YOU ARE TRYING TO FEEL BETTER ABOUT YOURSELF.  

Now how in the hell does any sort of third party opinion come out of that equation?  Obviously the people close to you probably reflect an accurate depiction of who you are.  If you are honest with them and with yourself, these people can help you be even more of yourself.  At their best, that is what friends and family do – help you be more of yourself.  But seeking self-love through the form of outside opinion destroys you. 

What worked for me is for two minutes every morning I look at myself in the mirror.  Butt.  Ass.  Naked.  I repeated the phrase “I love myself”.  Now, a weird thing starts to happen.  You feel ridiculous for the first thirty seconds.  The next fifteen, my voice started coming from my pelvis.  It felt deeper.  And then my head started to tingle.  For the last minute I feel more self-accepting and more focused on myself than I ever have in my life.  I am focused on what I want to do today.  I don’t look at handsome guys and get jealous.  I don’t look angry people and feel badly about them.  

The weirdest thing about this is that everyone on the street started to feel like my baby.  You read that right.  I felt happy to look in everyone’s faces.  It was like this radiant abundance was bouncing out of my eyes and finger tips and other people even smiled at me as I walked by.  I think my posture improved.  And above all, I was focused on myself.  I am so literally full of myself that it is impossible for anyone who may have a negative opinion of me to pour that opinion into my glass of self-fullness.  I have myself.  I love myself.  And that is enough.

Finally, you need to keep momentum.  The above two things help.  They help a lot.  But you need to be doing this stuff all of the time.  When you write in your notebook “Shit, I should have talked to that girl on the metro today, but I was afraid what the people around me would think of me”, you know what you have to do next time.  You bring it to the level of conscious thinking and you are more likely to realize what you have to do next time.  And when you do it, you feel great about yourself and focus solely on you, and the opinions of strangers or people whose opinion you should never really care about starts to melt away.  When you keep doing this, you gain what I like to call self-thinking momentum.  You start to see yourself from your own vantage point, judged from the spectrum of your values (which you hopefully analyze critically).  You stop seeing yourself as the image that you give to other people, and you forget what people not close to you think.  

Paradoxically, when you focus on yourself and the things you want, you will attract the type of people you want to share with including friends, family members, and partners.  These people will have high self-esteem as well, because self-esteem begets self-esteem.  It is not selfish in the way that our society labels selfishness at all.  When you are overflowing with self-love and doing the things that are important to you, not only do you forget what peoples’ negative opinions about you may be, but part of that love starts to be too much for you to hold on to yourself.  You start spreading positive emotions to everyone around you.  

And strangely enough, when you focus on yourself, people will like you even more.


----

[Marcus Geduld on Smartness](https://qr.ae/TW8PEP)


My grandmother was a kind of genius. She was generally acknowledged to be a great cook. This was remarkable, because she had no sense of smell and, for dietary reasons, rarely tasted her own food. And she didn't use recipes. 

She seemed to have an intuitive grasp of how to mix ingredients together to forge something yummy. Her talent came from decades of experimentation, lots of acquired wisdom, and a brain that was, apparently, rigged in such a way to give her easy access to this wisdom. She had all sorts of algorithms at her fingertips (do this, then do this, and do this ... if this, do that, else...) and an uncanny ability to improvise (I'm out of milk, so I'll use...).

She only had a high-school education and had little to say (at least to me) about politics, history, philosophy, literature or science. No one would have pegged her as "the smartest person in the room" and some people wouldn't have thought of her as smart at all.

People usually think I'm smart. I have two degrees. I am a computer programmer. I am a published author. I am a theatre director who specializes in Shakespeare.

What is the main difference between my grandmother and me? I happen to be interested in the "official" smart-set topics. My grandmother wasn't. She was interested (and highly knowledgable) in topics that aren't sanctioned by academics. (Yet most academics couldn't cook like her in a million years.)

If you happen to be more interested in philosophy than cooking or football or auto-mechanics, that's fine. But if you think your pet subjects are "better" or "higher" than other subjects, you don't have a logical leg to stand on.

As I said, above, people often think I'm smart. I've even been accused of being a genius, which I'm definitely not. But there's one situation in which people have had the opposite opinion of me, and I find it really fascinating: I have no interest in contemporary politics. (I have some interest in the politics of other eras in history, but I don't talk about that very much, so most people don't know.)

In a lot of social groups, "talking politics" is a signifier of intelligence. "Smart people" are supposed "have opinions" about Obama's fiscal policy; "smart people" are supposed to "read the New York Times"; "Smart people" are supposed to be able to discuss world affairs seriously. I often can't, because I don't know enough about them to say anything. I haven't read a newspaper in months.

We can argue about my social responsibility. Maybe I'm a bad person, because I'm not doing my civic duty and staying informed. But that's a different issue than whether or not I'm smart. 

Yesterday, I spent hours building a complex computer program that my friends would need years of training to even begin to understand. Then I ran a rehearsal for "Midsummer Night's Dream." But I have no opinion (or interest in) the situation in the Middle East, so in many situations, I'm one of the stupidest people in the room.

My point is that our metrics for what makes a smart person tend to be arbitrary and based on fashion -- most often on whether or not a person drops academic terms into casual conversation. If there are more accurate measures of intelligence (one's ability to perform abstract reasoning or whatever), we rarely use those metrics when "we're in a room with other people." So -- other than via crude, fashion-based signifiers -- we have no idea who the smartest person in the room is.

Is it the person who can talk about Schopenhauer? Is it the person who can fix a problem with any car? Is it the person who is a master of social situations (those poor folks are almost never credited with being smart, but as an nerdy, shy, introvert I am stunned by their skills!)?

So I think this is an ill-formed question. If I take the "be" in "What's it like to be the smartest person in the room?" literally, I can only say "I don't know," because "smartest person" is such a nebulous concept that no one can know if he's the smartest person in the room. 

Here's something (possibly related) that I can talk about: I am often the best person in the room at logical (as in syllogisms) reasoning and I'm also often the person in the room with the most "life experience." 

There are many people who are better logicians than I am (I'm sure there are many people here at Quora who are better), but I happen to be the best one in my social group. And the only reason why I have the most life experience is that I'm often around people who are younger than I am. When they're my age, they'll have just as much experience as I do now. Still, I often am the most "logical" person in the room and I often am the most experienced.  

The biggest frustration this causes me is that it often renders me totally unable to talk. Sometimes, based on, say, my 15-years of marriage, I know the guy next to me is wrong when he waxes about "relationships" after only ever having one girlfriend in his life -- and for only two weeks. But there's often not much I can say. (Or if I do speak up, it won't mean anything or change anything.) You can't force experience on people. They will get that experience when they get it. They have to go live for themselves.

I am quite often stymied because conversations are "illogical" and I'm the only one who notices or cares. I realize early on that an entire conversation doesn't make sense, and that it can't make sense, until everyone stops and examines the root assumptions behind the conversation. 

When I'm asked my opinion of the subject-at-hand, I freeze, because as far as I'm concerned, the subject is gibberish. On the other hand, I'll rightly be branded a freak if I say what's in my mind -- usually something like "If we want talk meaningfully about what the 'best' science-fiction movie is, we need to first define 'science-fiction' and 'best.' We need to clarify what our metric is for best, and we need to decide whether aesthetic judgements are subjective or objective." 

What's really going on here is that I'm getting stymied by my own skill. Yes, I can think logically and foundationally, and that helps me in my work. It also helps me have interesting thoughts about some topics I'm into. But it's not grounded in the reality of most human discourse.

I am aware, of course, that most conversations are not working in a framework of formal logic. Rather, they are more like stream-of-consciousness, call-and-response systems. "What's the best sci-fi movie?" doesn't literally mean "What's the best sci-fi movie?" In most conversations it means "I'm opening up the topic of sci-fi movies. Discuss it in any way that you'd like. Riff on my opening salvo..."

I know this, and I can sometimes flip into that framework, but my "intelligence" makes it harder for me than it is for "stupider" people. I hear a statement that's superficially in the form of a formal-logic statement, and my brain goes into formal-logic mode. I can't stop myself from thinking -- and dwelling on -- "you just said X but that contradicts your earlier claim that Y..."

So in those situations, who is really the smartest person in the room? The guy acting like (or at least thinking like) Mr. Spock -- the guy having trouble relating to the others in a casual, interesting way -- Or the guy who knows how to have a conversation without getting bogged down in literalism and inappropriate frameworks?

-----

[How can one stop caring about what people say or think about them?
](https://qr.ae/TW8PjO)

I am assuming you are relatively young. First of all I want to assure you that what you're feeling is quite normal. We've all been there. I can also imagine you feel that you're the only person feeling that way and I can assure you, you aren't. People are very good at hiding it, you are probably very good at hiding it as well. More than you think you are. People develop different kinds of strategies to cope with it: avoidance, indifference, cynicism, sarcasm, arrogance, overconfidence, etc... But that's mostly just a facade. Most of the time arrogance is a facade for insecurity. Everybody, except for psychopaths, to at least some extent, wonder whether people like them or not. We are social animals, it's how we are programmed to feel and behave.
What I think is the key element in Rebecca's answer is that you should accept who you are and accept that you can't really change yourself. You can change (to a certain extent) but only on the condition that you accept and value yourself as the person you are. It's kinda contradictory that change is only possible when there's actually no need to... but it's the truth.
One thing I feel isn't stressed enough in Rebecca's answer is time. You shouldn't rush things. Give it time. With time you'll have more experiences in life, you'll be happy when some things work out, you'll be depressed when things don't work out the way they should. But you'll also learn that failure or misfortunes are not the end of the world. You'll feel down for some time, but one day things will clear up and you'll pick up your life again.

From your question and the question details, I'm assuming you're an intelligent, sensitive person. That's a very valuable thing, something to cherish. The world needs more of those. Don't be ashamed for it. If you're a man, you might be taught that's not how a man's supposed to be. Don't follow that, it's bullsh*t. If you tend to overthink and theorize things, I have two things that could be of help if you study them:
1. The Dunning–Kruger effect says that intelligent people tend to be less confident then the less intelligent. If you feel insecure about something, consider it a proof of superior intelligence. It's mainly applied to knowledge and skills, but in my opinion it's applicable to social interactions as well. Think about it.
2. Study Game theory. It is the science of decision making when the outcome of your decision depends on other people's decisions. If e.g. you're trying to decide whether you should help somebody you don't like, your best strategy will depend on the other person's decisions and those of yet other people. It turns out, game theory can help us in our daily decisions in social interactions. What I always remember and try to bring into practice in real life is the Tit for tat strategy:
    * Be nice, be respectful, unconditionally, maybe even naively
    * Be ruthless once you are sure you're taken advantage of, teach people that deserve to a lesson
    * Be easy to forgive, don't hold grudges, they are counterproductive
    * Be grateful, always remember to say thank you to any person who does you a favor
    * Don't be envious, don't try to succeed at the expense of others  (I've added a few points of my own)

Below a picture from: Game Theory and game theory with a nice section on "Game theory and dating" and "Tit-for-tat and Introverted game"
￼

---


