---

layout: post-journal
title: Sell
date:   2019-01-23 09:00:11
tag: 
categories: guide
excerpt: 
permalink: /sell

---

Build Sales Skills. If you don't ask, you won't receive. Sell themselves, they sell their ideas, they sell and motivate others to do their bidding (this is scaling). Be competent. Know your stuff, know your product or services that you are trying to sell. Know your competitors, know your customer’s alternatives well. There is no quicker way to lose credibility when you aren’t prepared and exposed to be a know-nothing bullshitter. This is perhaps the biggest reason a lot of salespeople fail. They don’t put in the work in the first place and somehow expect to wing it. Know the difference between being enthusiastic and pushy. Enthusiasm can be quite infectious, but being pushy simply means you are trying to impose your own interests, your own agenda onto others. No one likes being told, harassed, or tricked into doing anything, even if it might be in their best interests. Think of it this way, would you rather go to a party or a school assembly? 

Selling is about story telling. I don’t care what culture what country you come from, as human beings, we all share one trait, that is we enjoy stories. Great salespeople and effective leaders know this all too well. We don’t buy products or services, we buy from people. Ultimately we want to be able to relate to one another. There is no better way than to tell stories to reveal the personality of you, your product or services. I am not suggesting you make up some BS story or some canned pitch. It has to be authentic. 

What is going to motivate anyone to do something for others? For money? For vanity? For altruism? If you can’t answer that question regarding whoever you are trying to target or sell to, then you haven’t done your homework. The least you can do is to do some digging and come up with a decent pitch. So instead of can you do this and that for me, you really should be putting a bit effort, tell a compelling story when you have nothing material to offer. offer something of value before you ask for anything. sales isn't about selling a product. It is about creating value-generating relationships that enrich the lives and businesses of both parties. 


* Wherever your company lands on this sliding scale, one thing will always remain true: *you have to be able to sell your product or service.* If you don’t sell it, no one else will. You team is relying on you to explain the benefits of the company and how it’s changing the world. It’s your job as the founder to communicate that vision. And realistically, you may not have a company for long if you can’t sell. Because it’s not just about doing interviews with journalists or sitting on panels. You have to pitch your idea to VCs if you really want a shot at building your startup into a lasting business. Personally, speaking in front of people was not one of my best traits when starting ThirdLove five years ago. But I’ve spoken at hundreds of interviews, panels, and events since then. Over time, I’ve gotten much better at it. Here’s what I learned along the way: 
    * *Practice with people you feel comfortable with.*
        It’s much easier to start practicing in front of people you know. They’ll be more forgiving when you make a mistake. And hopefully, you can solicit real feedback from them about what you need to work on. You can even do this internally at your company by giving updates or announcements to a small group of people. As you get more comfortable, increase the size of the group. If you want to practice pitching a potential investor, use your network to find another founder or an unrelated investor who’s willing to listen. The goal is to find someone who can give you candid feedback about your pitch and help you improve. For me, the most difficult part of selling my vision in the beginning was the fact that it was just a concept. I didn’t have something tangible to really help me capture that vision and communicate it the way I wanted to. But once your idea becomes a reality and you have a real product, talking about your company becomes much easier. 
    * *Focus on one point.*
        I learned this the hard way. When we launched ThirdLove in 2013, our executive team was three people: my co-founder Dave, our Chief Creative Officer, Ra’el, and me. We drove around San Francisco, meeting with different reporters to do interviews about our seed round and launch. 
        None of us had done these types of interviews before. And we quickly realized we had too many people in the room. The three of us were speaking in different styles and presenting an overwhelming amount of information. Each article reflected a different angle because we were inundating the reporters with too many talking points. 
        That experience taught me an important lesson: When announcing news to the press, you should always make it about one thing. Pick one point you want to get across and stick to that core story. It’s fine to use supporting points, but keep the focus on the idea you want to see in print. 
    * *Let your personality shine through.*
        As a founder, people just want honesty from you. They want to know about you, and they want to hear the truth come out of your mouth. 
        While it’s tempting to practice 1,000 times when you’re just starting to give interviews or pitch VCs, there is such a thing as being too rehearsed. And trust me, it sounds phony. It comes off as though you’re not listening to the other side of the conversation. You don’t seem like you’re engaged on a personal level. 
        And that personal engagement is important to investors, journalists, even potential employees. People want to connect with you, and the best way to let that happen is by being your authentic self. Show them who you are, and let go of the idea that you have to perfectly memorize and deliver every word. 
        When your personality shines through and people get a sense of who you are as a human being, they’re more inclined to like you and to help you. 
    * *Know you can’t predict everything.*
        You won’t be able to plan for everything that happens in an interview or a conference room. So that means you have to get used to dealing with the unknown. 
        If you’re asked a question you’re not prepared for, don’t scramble just to come up with a quick answer. It doesn’t matter whether you’re sitting across from a journalist or a VC—just tell them you don’t know. 
        You can say, “That’s a great question. Let me have my team pull that data and get back to you.” 
        Easy as that. Now you have time to make sure your answer is correct, as well as to reflect on how you want to answer the question later on. 
        My last piece of advice is simple: Remember, you’re the expert on this subject. 
        You started this company for a reason, and you know how you’re delivering value. Don’t lose sight of the fact that you know your business better than anyone. Keep that in mind, and you’ll have all the confidence you need stepping into the spotlight. 


* I was reading the brilliant book ‘To Sell is Human’ by Dan Pink[1] (https://www.quora.com/#kdwza). In the Chapter on Pitch (which is worth more than the weight of it in gold), he talks about different kind of pitches and then says, As you prepare your pitch, whichever variety you choose, clarify your purpose and strategy by making sure you can answer these three questions:
    After someone hears your pitch . . .
    * What do you want them to *know*?
    * What do you want them to *feel*?
    * What do you want them to *do*?
* If you’ve got strong answers to these three questions, the pitch will come together more easily. I apply same to my verbal and written communication now (be it emails, a proposal, website copy, client conversation, webinar etc etc). - Am I clearly making my audience know, feel and do what I want them to? If not, I refine it. I practice it until it is serving the purpose I want it to.
* Examples-
    * *Reminding a prospect who hasn’t enrolled yet*-
        Earlier- “Please let me know if you are enrolling”
        Better yet- “I hope you have all the information you need about our services. If you have any concerns, you can reach out to me personally. Since we work with limited clients and seats are filling fast (and I don’t want you to miss any deadlines), please inform me if you want me to hold a seat for you.”
    * *Writing an informational article*-
        Earlier- “What I think of XYZ issue”
        Now- “XYZ issue is _____ (facts). It is impacting ___ in this way (what it means for the reader). I think of it as a ______ (opinion). It is becoming more critical as we do not ____. If we want to change our ___, we need to act upon _____ (call to act).”
    * *Asking for a favor* **[This is combining Dan Pink’s wisdom with Dale Carnegie’s wisdom -
        Earlier- “I am ____ and I want ____.”
        Now- “I read your __ and found ___ pertinent to blah blah. I am a ____ and can help you improve_____ by ____. If this interests you, I would love to work together as _____. Can we get on a call this week anytime between 1-3pm to discuss this?”
    * *Rejecting something*-
        Earlier- “I am sorry but this does not work.”
        Now- “I admire your ____. You have helped me by ______. Since you appreciate my ___, it is important for me to point out the problems in this proposal. I do not think it works because ___. We may do __<an alternative if relevant>___. Let me know what you think about it.”
    * *The key is that every form of communication is not about* ***me*** *but about* ***you**.* **Including this post. If the information I share here cannot help you improve and is not implementable, it is useless. You can apply this little shift of mindset to improve any form of communication.
* You may not be the best writer, best vocabularist or best grammarist - but you can care and make it all about your reader and that is all that matters truly in the end.
* P.S. An extension of this that I practice - if anything I am saying/writing is not going to make the reader feel better or helping her improve, it is better to scratch it out. I know negative thoughts, darkness have a place but that is in fiction. In real life and non-fiction, look at what is beautiful and if something is not, think of how it can be improved.



- http://tiny.website/?utm_content=footer-network
- https://twitter.com/mikekarnj/status/1004814247954698247
- http://justinmares.com/the-4-kinds-of-side-businesses-you-can-start/


-----
