---
layout: post-journal
title: Learn
date:   2019-03-23 09:00:11
tag:
categories: guide
excerpt: The art of learning
permalink: /learn
comments: false

---


- “When one person hesitates because he feels inferior, the other is busy making mistakes and becoming superior.” 

- “The expert has failed more times than the beginner has even tried" 


- Like batters practicing different sort of curveballs, vary your subjects (e.g. JEE training). Out in the wild, you need to be fully present, flexible, and attentive to the specific details of the problem "in the wild, you have to first perceive what sort of issue you're confronting before you can begin to discover an answer” 

-  Compose your own reply first, before comparing with others/inviting expert opinion/ criticism and feedback

- Recovery: Bring it over from memory (and use hacks, acronyms etc. to remember)

- Connect to what you already know

- Review and record what went well and what didn’t. Evaluate what worked and what didn’t. Only 15 minutes of composed reflection toward the day's end expanded execution by 23% for one gathering of workers.

- People would let you do anything if you are confident enough (e.g. painting cars with google logo and placing cones in the middle of the street, or putting ‘don’t lock this door tonight’ by burglars)



------

Start with the idea or topic at hand and...

1. Step in and step back, step in and step back... For instance, if the topic is abortion, think about its ramifications on a specific 16-year-old girl, maybe an actual girl that you know. Then think about its ramifications for society. 

Each time you add a new detail to your mental construction, step in and step back again. 

This is a really useful process for artistic creation: (step in) what is the color of the grain of sand that the hero is rubbing between his fingers? (step back) What is the story I'm trying to tell?

2. Think sensually. Humans are sensual creatures: we live through taste, touch, smell, seeing and hearing -- also through fucking, fleeing and fighting. How can you tie your idea in with your lizard brain? Or how can you free it from your lizard brain? 

The more abstract your topic is, the more it will benefit from sensuality. Is there a way to explore that equation or philosophical idea via sound or color? Do it! 

Note: geeky folks in their teens and twenties have a very hard time with this. (I sure did!) They tend to want to live in a world in which everyone is a sort of Mr. Spock and the only thing that exists is pure reason. That's not the real world. 

3. Think socially. Even before you fully understand an idea, try to communicate it to someone else. Take note of the parts that were hard to explain and the parts the listener didn't understand. Work on those parts. Brainstorm to come up with sharp examples and metaphors. Keep rethinking and rethinking how you communicate, even if you feel you have come up with the perfect explanation. 

Quora is a great playground for this sort of thing. 

Note: PowerPoint is evil. When I was teaching, I forced myself to redraw the same charts over and over for each class, and I found that this process helped me refine them. 

Also, collaborate! Get a core group of people to brainstorm with you, and, every once in a while, add a new person into the mix. 

4. Do. If it's possible to do it, do it -- don't just think it. If you're sure you know what the result will be, do it anyway. The human brain plugs more easily into the concrete than the abstract. 

When I work with actors, and they do a scene as if they're character is depressed, I often say, "Try it as if your character is happy." They often say something like, "That won't work, because..." I say, "You're probably right, but please try it, anyway."

They sometimes worry that I'm asking them to try it because that's secretly the way I want them to do it. They feel it's wrong, and they balk at trying it, because they think if they do, I'm going to force them to do it that way forever.

I work to calm their fears. I have no desire to force them into anything. I just have a profound belief that we don't know unless we try. And the more sure we are that we know, the more we need to try. 

The only time it's not appropriate to try is when doing so is impossible or prohibitively costly in terms of time or resources. 

5. Dig deep. Like a small, annoying child, keep asking "but why?... but why?... but why?..." Keep digging until you get to the foundation, the axiom, the article of faith, the unknowable. Note: the "unknowable" is not the same as "I don't know." What you don't know, you can research. If you can research it, you haven't reached the foundation yet. The foundation is what all your ideas lie on top of, so it's worth knowing what it is and what it implies.

6. MASTER research tools. Note: that includes but doesn't stop with google, Quora and wikipedia. If you've ever said, "I googled it and couldn't find the answer" and then stopped trying, that's a fail. 

7. Learn more than you have to. If you're trying to learn how to bake bread, also learn how to bake cakes and muffins. Confidence comes from feeling some slack around the edges of your knowledge. If you feel like one question could slam you into a wall of ignorance, you're not there yet. Your knowledge needs breathing room.

8. Push yourself to failure. You learn from failure, as long as you push through it. Once you've mastered solving a particular kind of problem, you don't grow by continually doing those same sorts of problems. So add more challenges. You'll know you've added enough when you fail. And you only fail at failing when you don't keep pushing through it.  

9. Play. Improvise, brainstorm, rap, rhyme, etc. Once you loosen the constraints on your brain, your subconscious mind will lead you to all sorts of interesting places. If you think "this topic is too serious for that," you're stuck in a rut and will be unable to come up with all sorts of ideas that would occur to you if you played in the mud for a while.

10. Take a break. Your brain continues to chew after you've stopped forcing food into it. Let it chew on its own for a while. If you're feeling brain dead, stop! Sleep on it. Or, better yet, do something totally different from the problem you're working on and then sleep. 

11. Falsify your cherished notions. You're a Democrat? What if the Republicans are right? You're an atheist? What if there's a God? If you're closed off to any avenue of thought, there are things you won't think of. 

Thinking is safe. Don't worry: you won't suddenly start throwing litter out the window just because you muse on the possibility that Global Warming might be a lie. 

If it feels safer to you, imagine you're writing a science-fiction novel in which Global Warming is a lie. It's not a lie on our planet, but it is a lie on planet Alpha Prime Zeta. Okay, what are the ramifications on that planet? 

Do whatever it takes to push through closed mental doors. 

Those things that you're super-confident about: slavery is evil; gay marriage should be legalized; one plus one equals two... Those thing aren't wrong. It's good that you're confident about them. But the bad thing about confidence is that it closes mental doors. That's kind of the point: "I don't have to think about that any more. I'm confident that I'm right about it." Allow yourself to say, "I know slavery is evil, but what if...?"

Your thoughts will never cause slavery to happen. Your thoughts are morally neutral. Stephen King is, by all accounts I've heard, a great guy, but he lets himself imagine people getting dismembered. And no one ever actually gets dismembered because of his thoughts. As long as you feel certain thoughts are wrong, you'll stop yourself from exploring many (possibly) fruitful avenues of thinking. You can't know if they're fruitful or not until you stroll down them.

12. Carry your ideas to their logical conclusions. "I think the sexes should be treated completely equally!" Okay, does that mean we need to abolish separate bathrooms for men and women in the workplace, just as we've abolished separate bathrooms for black people and white people? The goal, when taking your notions to extremes, isn't necessarily to poke holes; it's to test boundaries. In what cases does your idea apply? in what cases does it not apply?

13. Thwart your ego. Ego is almost always the enemy of thought. Most people don't let themselves "go there" -- "there" being to certain mental places -- because they think "I'm not smart enough." 

Which means they're scared of getting their ego bruised by feeling stupid. Fuck that shit! That closes tons and tons of mental doors. You don't need to be smart to think about anything! You don't need to be right to think about anything! To think, you just need to think. It's okay to fail when you think. It's good to fail. (See item 8.)

To fully embrace this -- and to vanquish ego -- you have to give up thinking in order to prove you're right, to impress your friends and to "be original." Those are all core human urges, and you're never going to rid yourself of them, but try to compartmentalize when your goal is to show off or argue vs when your real goal is to grow mentally or to solve a problem.

If you have convinced yourself that you never think to be right or come off as smart or win points, you're in trouble. We all do that. Admit it. Embrace the fact that you're sometimes going to do it. Know when you're doing it, and stop doing it when it's not appropriate. 

14. Think to serve. This is what most helps me thwart my ego. I'm a theatre director and an author. When I direct plays -- as soon as I start hoping the audience will think kindly of me or be impressed with me -- I remind myself that it's not about me. 

It's about the play. My goal is to serve, to serve the play, to serve the story. The story isn't my servant; I'm its servant. If I'm writing a book, my goal is to serve the reader and the subject. 

As soon as I redirect my energies that way, my mind expands. 

Sites like Quora can be great for this, as long as you use them to serve knowledge and not to win arguments, be right or look smart.

15. Don't ever try to be original. That's a mental dead end. When I'm working on a play, I sometimes get the urge to come up with something "cool" or "different." As soon as I feel that pull, I resist. 

My goal is to tell the story, not to get points for originality. Don't ever try to be cool or original unless that's your acknowledged goal. If your goal is personal growth or problem solving, trying to be original will block you. And the irony is that, by not trying to be original at all, by just honestly working to tackle the problem, you'll wind up being original, because your work will be filtered through you, and you are unique in all the world. 

Note: it's hard to



——apply a negative, like "don't be original." When I feel the urge to be original, I sometimes force myself to be derivative. If you're ever stuck because though you know how to solve a problem, you don't want to solve it the way everyone else does -- because that would be "copying" -- copy!

Short, famous version: "kill all your darlings."

16. Eliminate distractions. Every ounce of energy you're not spending on the problem is ... not spent on the problem. So are you wearing comfortable clothes? Is the lighting okay? Are there distracting noises? Do you have pens and paper and whatever else you need near you? It's a bitch if you have to stop working on a problem because you can't find a pen that works. I don't like to waste money, but I overbuy bens and paper and reference books. I want to be able to reach out and have whatever I need leap into my hand. 

17. Study History. It's all happened before; it will all happen again. Use it! By "History," I mean World History, local History or the history of some specific craft -- whatever is appropriate to your endeavor. 

18. Identify rigidity and fluidity. What parts of the structure must remain fixed or it ceases to be whatever it is? What parts must be elastic or its not living up to its potential? 

Think of yourself as a jazz musician, improvising on "Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star." What notes must be played or the song gets so perverted that it's no longer the song? What parts can be improvised? Are you forcing yourself to hit nails on their heads? Are you forcing yourself to run willy, nilly between those nails?

19. Switch mediums. If you're thinking with prose, draw pictures. If you're lecturing, try miming. Try imposing arbitrary constraints: write about your topic, but force yourself to forgo using all forms of the verb "to be." See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E-P...

20. Take care of yourself. Exercise and eat well. Get a good night's sleep. There is no brain-body separation. Your brain is part of your body. It's a machine that requires tremendous amounts of energy. Feed it. Care for it. Love it.

----

1. Think about the subject matter, discuss it with others - Write the fundamental, logical questions. Try to figure it out for yourself, get help only when stuck 
2. Visualizable, Concrete Metaphors
3. Analogies with other things you know
4. Connections with other things you know (a.k.a. Mind Map)
5. Ask Why after Each sentence
6. Ask yourself Questions
7. Explain to a 5 year old (Teach, Paraphrase)
8. Sample Essays
9. Write Questions (Doubts, Definitions, Applications) in the Margin, and Answers on the Right.  If you get stuck, take a peek at your textbook to get the main idea 
10. redescribe the problems presented to them, often use qualitative arguments to plan solutions before elaborating them in greater mathematical detail, and make many decisions by first exploring their consequences. Furthermore, the underlying knowledge of such experts appears to be tightly structured in hierarchical fashion. 
11. Spaced Repetition


---

You will learn a lot if you share ideas with fellow students, and if you try out ideas in tutorial discussion.


Remember that tutorials are not designed as a substitute for lectures, or for accumulating information, but to develop coherent verbal arguments and the capacity to think on one’s feet, and to tackle specific difficulties and misunderstandings. . This means that note-taking, if it occurs in a tutorial 12 PPE HANDBOOK 2014-15 at all, should be very much incidental to the overriding dialogue. You should, however, leave time after the tutorial to make a record on paper of the discussion. 


----

How to write essayss


1. Say what you are going to Say, Say it, then repeat what you have said

2. Abstract:
• Find a subject you care about.
• Do not ramble.
• Keep it simple.
• Have the guts to cut.
• Sound like yourself.
• Say what you mean to say.
• Pity the readers.

3. Work on a tutorial essay involves library searches, reading, thinking, and writing. It should occupy a minimum of three days. Read attentively and thoughtfully. As your reading progresses, think up a structure for your essay (but do not write an elaborate plan which you will not have time to execute). Expect to have to sort out your thoughts, both during and after reading. Use essays to develop an argument, not as places to store information. 
4. Focus on the words and structure of the question. Look for hints.
5.First Class script: work displaying analytical and argumentational power, with good command of the facts and/or arguments relevant to the questions and evidence of ability to organise them with clarity, insight and efficiency. When these qualities are evident in all questions attempted, the mark should be 80 or above. Where these qualities are evident throughout and the script displays original thought of near publishable standard, the mark should be 90 or above. Answer displaying rigorous and independent thinking, a keen critical understanding of relevant material, transparent organisation and presentation, clear and precise expression, effective use of examples.
6.The examiners are looking for your own ideas and convictions and you mustn’t be shy of presenting them.When you have selected a question, work out what it means and decide what you think is the answer to it.Then, putting pen to paper, state the answer and defend it; or, if you think there is no answer, explain why not. Abstain from presenting background material. Do not write too much: most of those who run out of time have themselves to blame for being distracted into irrelevance.
Comrades,


I promised some people that I would send out an email with advice on how to structure an essay, so here's a great little guide I've borrowed from one of my tutors. If you have any questions, feel free to ask:

B.1 Introduction: A tutorial essay provides an answer to a question provided in the tutorial topics outlined above. It must include an introductory paragraph in which you outline the question, touch upon the societal and scientific relevance of this question, concisely define key concepts and briefly summarise the answer which you will give to it. Please keep your introduction short.


B.2 Argumentation: The main body of the essay provides the argumentation you develop in support of your answer to the overall research question. It is important that you here answer the question itself: an essay is not a general discussion on a broad topic; it is an answer to a specific question. So, for example, if you are asked the question “Is economic growth a prerequisite for the development of a democratic political system?”, you cannot write a general discussion on democracy. You have to tackle this particular question. Accordingly, you must ensure, when writing the essay, that every single sentence and paragraph is directed to, and useful for, providing this particular answer.


In developing your answer, please provide several arguments that support it whilst also engaging with possible counter-arguments. It is thus important that the main body of your essay reflects the key debates within the field that you are writing about (i.e. in case of the question highlighted in the previous paragraph the study of democratisation). There are various ways of structuring this. A fairly standard one (and relatively safe!) is to make your case for a particular answer (X) and then examine and reject objections to X. Or vice versa.


One of the most common criticisms which essays elicit is ‘asserts rather than argues its points.’ It is one thing to say X; it is quite another to provide a justification for X. In an academic essay, you are asked to do the latter. One way of providing justification for the theoretical arguments you present is by backing these up with empirical examples. However, make sure that you do not engage with evidence in a merely anecdotal manner. For instance, in the example discussed above about economic growth and democracy an argument against a potential relationship between the two may be that it is not economic growth per se that leads to democratisation, but rather an egalitarian distribution of increasing economic wealth. A possible empirical example that could underline this point could be the fact that in many countries of the Middle East high levels of economic growth (mainly through oil revenues) have not led to the development of democratic political systems. This authors argue is mainly due to wealth has not trickled down to the middle class in society which in turn have not out forward demands for more political input. Providing this piece of empirical evidence is much more instructive than simply describing the situation in Libya under Gaddafi’s rule.


B.3 Conclusion: You should finish the essay with a concluding paragraph which summarises the main findings, and, if appropriate, opens up the debate (e.g. by mentioning other issues which are relevant and interesting but which constitutes further avenues of inquiry). It is important that your conclusion entails the answer to the question posed. Please keep your conclusion short. 
-------

Exams:  http://www.quora.com/Are-there-any-tips-on-getting-a-first-class-honours-for-PPE-Philosophy-Politics-and-Economics-at-Oxford 

1. Get Hold of Great Essays : 1st
2. Talk to lots of professors about what makes a good exam script. Find experienced / well-looked-upon professors, since they're more likely to be the ones actually marking exams.
3. Write lots and lots of practice essays, in timed conditions, from past papers, then give them to credible professors and get them to write detailed feedback and points of improvement. If the feedback isn't detailed enough, meet them & get them to explain specifically what would bring the script to the 70+ and 80+ level. Then re-write the essays and do those things.
4. My sense was that a good paper (a) demonstrated a grasp of the literature & the core issues of the subject, but concisely, then (b) advanced a compelling and somewhat original answer to the question, in (c) a comprehensive way, i.e. with cognizance of the most sophisticated objections. T
5. Get into a routine, and start early. Finals are a massive grind, and you will burn out if you rely on the caffeine + all nighters school of studying (unless you're superhuman / start really late). I personally found that working 9am - 1pm, 3pm - 5pm, and 8pm - 11pm every day, with an early afternoon nap, was the best routine for me, and that I worked best in particular libraries. Work all of this stuff out early then just stick to it so that you don't need to worry.
6. know your position on a particular issue inside out.  Do not answer any Finals questions if you aren't crystal clear on what you think.  Example - I went into Political Theory being a card-carrying Rawlsian.  I knew what I thought on all the common questions, knew how the positions inter-linked and so on.
7. come to a conclusion.  This is heavily linked with (b).  Examiners don't want a critical survey of the literature - they want you to argue a position.  This is why it's so important to know what you think
8. argue with your coursemates.  This of course is only possible if they're also passionate about the subject, so hard-cheese if they're not.  Alternatively you can argue online with people.  The problem with this is that you've normally no way of knowing whether the person online is a total idiot or not.  I used to post on a fairly esoteric philosphy forum, but that was only useful because it was heavily moderated and fools weren't tolerated
9. Practise, practise, practise.  As Nabeel says, repeatedly answer past paper questions so that you get good at putting down your thoughts quickly.  Once you open the real paper in Exam Schools and have read the questions, it should not take you long to select which questions you wish to answer to know basically precisely what you're going to argue.  There'll be some thinking on your feet if the question comes at the topic from an odd angle but there's only so many questions that can be asked on political obligation, for example.



Writing Exams - Scratching out


1. I can only do one text with note-taking: which makes sense for the final exam as the goal. Reading 2-3 would require abandoning note taking.
2. A way of learning I have is that I ask myself questions, and allow the text to fill in the gaps. Again, time consuming. Shall I just read first?
3. How to take notes? What paraphrasing gains in understanding, it loses in precision.


How to write an economic essay? First write, and then incorporate notes, or write directly from notes in book. Or something in between? A Structure all by yourself, and fill in details by copying? Structure by the book, and fill in details by yourself, and then collate?




The Best Conclusions Relate to the Introduction. Introduction should be interesting.



Another skill, useful primarily for grades, is to learn to anticipate what kinds of questions teachers will ask in exams. This seems obvious, but many people don't spend enough time gaming this aspect of school. It's not about constantly asking "will this be on the test?", which will make your teachers hate you. Instead:
• Notice which topics, problems, and techniques really excite the teacher.

• Look at old exams.

• Imagine constructing an exam based on what you have learned: which questions are about the right level of difficulty for an exam?
Working backwards from what the exam will probably look like is likely to be more efficient than grinding linearly through everything you have covered and trying to prepare for everything.

Don't memorize lots of meaningless facts and strings of symbols. It's too hard to hold them in your head for exams. It's also a complete waste of time from an educational point of view as you will forget all this immediately after exams anyway. Learn stories, concepts, and ideas that make the facts intelligible. People don't have trouble remembering names and statistics of players on their favorite sports teams because these facts are meaningful. If you can find a way to make your studies meaningful to you, you will learn with less effort and more retention.


Is the difficulty of Caltech exaggerated?

￼

> I’m a senior now at Caltech. Having some experience with the problem sets given out here, my view is that my perception of a problem’s difficulty is significantly affected by my attitude.
As an incoming freshman, I had come to Caltech with little exposure to the concepts taught in freshman calculus and physics. As such, I approached problems with minimal confidence and patience. If I couldn’t see a path to the solution right away, I’d quickly lose hope and go ask for help; my view was either that “I must be thinking about the problem terribly wrong” or “I’m missing some important concept.” With this mentality, I viewed many problems as insurmountable.
But after taking some more classes, I learned how to temper the emotional side of things. I came to accept the inherent chaos that ensues when solving “hard problems,” and didn’t give up as easily. Importantly, I started to view my progress on a problem not in terms of “how close I am to the solution,” but rather “how well I understand the problem.”
As an example, suppose I was at the library last night working on a specific math proof for some time, but still hadn’t found the solution. As a freshman, I would’ve viewed my net progress for that night as 0. Now, I’d probably find comfort in other indicators of progress such as my improved understanding of the problem itself, and the elimination of some wrong ways to solve the problem.
Adopting the latter attitude, I’ve been able to approach problems with increased composure. I’ve been able to solve more problems on my own, and feel a little bit more “in control.” To answer your question, if people say Caltech is “impossible” or “very difficult,” I don’t believe it’s an exaggeration, but I think their view may partly be due to behavioral factors.


---

**References**

- [Thinking and Explaining](https://mathoverflow.net/questions/38639/thinking-and-explaining) 
- [What's your learning routine?](http://sinahab.com/blog/whats-your-learning-routine/)
- [Five Steps to Crystal Clear Thinking](https://hackernoon.com/five-steps-to-crystal-clear-thinking-6e94372789af)
- [How to practice effectively](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f2O6mQkFiiw)
- [How should I think? What is the best way of thinking for a better life?](https://qr.ae/TW8xhg)
