---
layout: post-journal
title: Repartees
date:   2019-01-23 09:00:11
tag: 
categories: journal
excerpt: 
permalink: /repartee

---




-----



* True, spontaneous wit results from using language to defend an attitude  which is hard to defend given the circumstances 


> “As a VC there are certain things you’re not allowed to say. Being the Best College is one of them. But I can say that this is the warmest reception I have received” -  Louise Richardson, newly appointed Oxford VC, on her first to HMC    
> 
>  “It is a sobering thought that we still have to be given a sermon on humility”- Louise Richardson, after a sermon in our college


* Timing and delivery (when and how) is the key. Sometimes remaining cool, confident, calm and smiling does more damage than saying something. 


* You can have a sense of humor. You can know that it’s not personal. And you can just find creative ways to solve the problem. But at the end of the day, the most important thing is that you deliver.
    > Well, you see, women are considered bad luck in our industry,” and everybody froze, the CEO and all the people in our group from Bain and Company. I just turned around and said, “Well, in that case, I think that you should make sure that I go to every single one of your competitors.” (from Oriet Gadish)

* Reincorporate from past conversations or details remembered
    > “Oh who told you that, your ____?"
    >
    > Last I checked...

* Accept and exaggerate: If someone criticizes you, embrace the criticism and exaggerate it. 
    > If someone calls you immature, say “that’s what my kindergarten teacher says.”
    >
    > If someone calls you fat, say “ten more pounds and I’m ready for the Santa suit.”
    >
    > And if you don’t think you can come up with one-liners on the fly, you can simply give a knowing look, and say, “you don’t know the half of it” or “yeah, it’s worse than you think.”

* Convey Indifference: 
    > What I am telling you is that I am not thinking about (Obama on Sarah Palin)
    > Frankly, me dear, I don’t give a damn
    > Know what's funny? You know who I am and I have no idea who you are.
    > Other options: Smirk, Raise Eyebrows, Dismiss, Roll Eyes, Yawn.

* Take the words literally
    > “I wasn’t trying to be difficult…”
    >
    > “I did not want to shag his friend” (JP to Thierry)


* Yes, and mirror. Mirror the rhythm or structure of the sentence to convey your own point.   Use ambiguity and rhythm.  Use puns and doube meaning.
    >  Talking you yourself again, Kenny? Harharharhar(stupid laughing). Better than talking to you, Mark,"
 
* Hit Back
    > You don’t have the best of track records in that department….
    >
    > Don’t be thowing stones when you live in a glass house!
    >
    > Are you projecting your own….?
    >
    > Says the person who.. [Woah Woah Woah….A person from Pakistan, of all people…]
    >
    > Takes one to know one
    >
    > Voice of experience speaking
    >
    > You and I have so much in common

* Accept and use ambiguity change context. 
    > TWSS
    >
    > If “Plan A” didn’t work. Don’t worry; the alphabet has 25 more letters
    >
    > Dear MATH, stop asking to find your X, she’s not coming back.


* Think of an idiom appropriate to the context but convey it indirectly
    > Hey, I found your Nose; it was in my business again.   
    >
    > Behind every great man is a woman rolling her eyes.   
    >
    > Think twice before you speak, you’d be able to say something more Insulting.

* Draw on Opinion vs Fact distinction
    > My opinions may have changed, but not the fact that I am right.   
    >
    > Thats, just, uh, your opinion man. I don’t remember asking for your opinion.

*  Draw a somewhat non-standard analogy, and then reveal analogous qualities in a surprising way.
    > Procrastination is like masturbation, it's all good and fun until you realize you are only fucking yourself!
    >   
    > I like my salad how i like my women. Without any dressing.

* Irritate by Patronising
    > ”Do you need a hug?”
    >
    > “Don’t let your emotions get the better of you”  
    >
    > “You seem stressed”
    >
    > “Is there anything that I can do for you?"
    >
    > “That’s why you love me”

* Cliched, gender-specific comebacks
   > To Women: I am good in bed/ I am turned on
   > To Men: Small Penis/Your Mom
* Mock 
  > Repeat in a funny voice

* Appeal to realism (even if its not real)
    > C’mon lets be honest here
    >
    > Lets be real
    >
    > Who are we kidding?
    >
* Elevate your Status or Lowers others
    > Thank you, for proving my point.   
    >
    > I wouldn’t expect any less   
    >
    > I refuse to have a battle of wits with someone unarmed    
    >
    > You flatter yourself...   
    >  
    > High school trope (What are we, still in high school?
    >
    > GO and show strength or power (ACTION COMEBACKS e.g. go and touch them while making eye contact all the time, or take something of theirs) OR Threaten (SAY THAT AGAIN?  I WOULD CUT YOUR DICK OFF/ I would break your legs) 

* Sarcasm (revealing by sayiing what is obviously untrue)
    > ‘Its ok man. It’s your college, so you can say it”   
    >
    > What a beautiful gesture!
    >

* Damn them with faint praise
    > A woman was asked whether she liked this other person. She paused for a second and said "...I think she's very beautiful."
    >
    > If it's an online interaction, you can praise them, say, for not overusing apostrophes or for understanding where commas go. Come to think of it, even if you work with this person in so-called "real life" you can praise their apostrophe use or the clever way they use capital letters correctly..or what have you, as they say.
    >   
    > If they are, perhaps, trying to make themselves "useful" to you, you can always say brightly - "Oh I so appreciate that you are willing to help me. I will be sure to get in touch when that's necessary."
    >
    > Or a lovely conversation ender which I've seen many an English person use to brilliant effect:  "Ah, but don't let me keep you." (even when the annoying person clearly still wanted to continue the discussion.)   
    >
    > You could say "I could see you really getting good at what you're doing someday" 
    
   


* Show the courage of being Real
    > You know what, now that I'm telling it, it's not as funny as it sounded in my head.
    >
    > All right, all right. That joke's better than you acted. Perhaps it's not. Maybe it's dumb. It could be. I hear you, man. I'm not a fuckin', genius, for Christ's sake, you know? I'm just tryin' to tell some jokes. Shit, who the fuck are you? That track is number 14. It's called "Attitude."


* Draw from immediate context to snub
    > “I hate technology” [in an elevator] “ Then why don’t you take the stairs"


* Use Snowclones and Appropriate Phrases
    > “Thanks for holding the fort. All quiet on the western front?”
    > “This agression will not stand, man”
    > Curse your sudden but inevitable betrayal
    > "10 Points!” (instead of Yes)
    > Death by X
    > “Great Minds…. think alike”
    > Don’t count your chickens before they hatch
    > Everything you heard is true"
    > Regress
    >> Who will watch the watchman?
    >
    > Draw on the distinction between Idea and Execution. An idea might be right, even if the execution is flawed 
    >> Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists
    >>  Rationalism from rationalism
    >> Liberalism from liberals 


>   Sadly so many people confuse egotism with self-esteem. They ain't the same zip code. 
Groucho Marx provided the best answer to this question when he was invited to join an exclusive gentlemen's club and responded, "I wouldn't join any club that would have me as a member." By using humor, he both snubbed the snobs and poked fun at himself.


----

Movie Scenes:



- [Reality Bites](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LdsaucLvRb4)
- [Kate and Leopold](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LdsaucLvRb4)

----


> “This [Liverpool team] reminds me of the Arsenal's invicibles"  
> “Except they aren’t invincibles"


> “When it comes to numbers, India wins at most things!"   
> “Like Rapists"

>  "It is England but India has more support in the stadium, and the pitch is completely assisting your spinners. Says a lot about our hospitality, right...""       
>  "Well... we let you rule our nation for so many years. I believe that's the least you can do for us" (courtesy Harsha Bhogle:)

> Where did you get your Boobs from? "Assume Its at the corner of x (“Stop talking to me”)  and y (“You can’t afford them”…)" - Amy Schumer to a heckler

  
