---
layout: post-journal
title: Witticize
date:   2019-01-23 09:00:11
tag: The Way With Words
categories: guide
excerpt: 
permalink: /rhetoric

---



* True, spontaneous wit results from using language to defend an attitude  which runs counter to what is expected, or which is hard to defend. It is a kin to a creative solution, showing a third way when there seem to be none, and the joy comes from the discovery and the reveal. 


> “As a VC there are certain things you’re not allowed to say. Being the Best College is one of them. But I can say that this is the warmest reception I have received” -  Louise Richardson, newly appointed Oxford VC, on her first to HMC  

 > You can have a sense of humor. You can know that it’s not personal. And you can just find creative ways to solve the problem." - Oriet Gadish
 > 
 > Well, you see, women are considered bad luck in our industry,” and everybody froze, the CEO and all the people in our group from Bain and Company. I just turned around and said, “Well, in that case, I think that you should make sure that I go to every single one of your competitors.”  
 >
   

* Often the the reveal comes from looking at things from a different, or wider perspective, or more holistic perspective. One can connect different perspectives to compose forms such as irony. 

>  “It is a sobering thought that we still have to be given a sermon on humility”- Louise Richardson, after a sermon in our college


* Timing and delivery (when and how) is the key. Sometimes remaining cool, confident, calm and smiling does more damage than saying something. 


*

    

* Reincorporate from past conversations or details remembered
    > “Oh who told you that, your ____?"
    >
    > Last I checked...

* Accept and exaggerate: If someone criticizes you, embrace the criticism and exaggerate it. 
    > If someone calls you immature, say “that’s what my kindergarten teacher says.”
    >
    > If someone calls you fat, say “ten more pounds and I’m ready for the Santa suit.”
    >
    > And if you don’t think you can come up with one-liners on the fly, you can simply give a knowing look, and say, “you don’t know the half of it” or “yeah, it’s worse than you think.”

* Convey Indifference: 
    > What I am telling you is that I am not thinking about (Obama on Sarah Palin)
    > Frankly, me dear, I don’t give a damn
    > Know what's funny? You know who I am and I have no idea who you are.
    > Other options: Smirk, Raise Eyebrows, Dismiss, Roll Eyes, Yawn.

* Take the words literally
    > “I wasn’t trying to be difficult…”
    >
    > “I did not want to shag his friend” (JP to Thierry)


* Yes, and mirror. Mirror the rhythm or structure of the sentence to convey your own point.   Use ambiguity and rhythm.  Use puns and doube meaning.
    >  Talking you yourself again, Kenny? Harharharhar(stupid laughing). Better than talking to you, Mark,"
 
* Hit Back
    > You don’t have the best of track records in that department….
    >
    > Don’t be thowing stones when you live in a glass house!
    >
    > Are you projecting your own….?
    >
    > Says the person who.. [Woah Woah Woah….A person from Pakistan, of all people…]
    >
    > Takes one to know one
    >
    > Voice of experience speaking
    >
    > You and I have so much in common

* Accept and use ambiguity change context. 
    > TWSS
    >
    > If “Plan A” didn’t work. Don’t worry; the alphabet has 25 more letters
    >
    > Dear MATH, stop asking to find your X, she’s not coming back.


* Think of an idiom appropriate to the context but convey it indirectly
    > Hey, I found your Nose; it was in my business again.   
    >
    > Behind every great man is a woman rolling her eyes.   
    >
    > Think twice before you speak, you’d be able to say something more Insulting.

* Draw on Opinion vs Fact distinction
    > My opinions may have changed, but not the fact that I am right.   
    >
    > Thats, just, uh, your opinion man. I don’t remember asking for your opinion.

*  Draw a somewhat non-standard analogy, and then reveal analogous qualities in a surprising way.
    > Procrastination is like masturbation, it's all good and fun until you realize you are only fucking yourself!
    >   
    > I like my salad how i like my women. Without any dressing.

* Irritate by Patronising
    > ”Do you need a hug?”
    >
    > “Don’t let your emotions get the better of you”  
    >
    > “You seem stressed”
    >
    > “Is there anything that I can do for you?"
    >
    > “That’s why you love me”

* Cliched, gender-specific comebacks
   > To Women: I am good in bed/ I am turned on
   > To Men: Small Penis/Your Mom
* Mock 
  > Repeat in a funny voice

* Appeal to realism (even if its not real)
    > C’mon lets be honest here
    >
    > Lets be real
    >
    > Who are we kidding?
    >
* Elevate your Status or Lowers others
    > Thank you, for proving my point.   
    >
    > I wouldn’t expect any less   
    >
    > I refuse to have a battle of wits with someone unarmed    
    >
    > You flatter yourself...   
    >  
    > High school trope (What are we, still in high school?
    >
    > GO and show strength or power (ACTION COMEBACKS e.g. go and touch them while making eye contact all the time, or take something of theirs) OR Threaten (SAY THAT AGAIN?  I WOULD CUT YOUR DICK OFF/ I would break your legs) 

* Sarcasm (revealing by sayiing what is obviously untrue)
    > ‘Its ok man. It’s your college, so you can say it”   
    >
    > What a beautiful gesture!
    >

* Damn them with faint praise
    > A woman was asked whether she liked this other person. She paused for a second and said "...I think she's very beautiful."
    >
    > If it's an online interaction, you can praise them, say, for not overusing apostrophes or for understanding where commas go. Come to think of it, even if you work with this person in so-called "real life" you can praise their apostrophe use or the clever way they use capital letters correctly..or what have you, as they say.
    >   
    > If they are, perhaps, trying to make themselves "useful" to you, you can always say brightly - "Oh I so appreciate that you are willing to help me. I will be sure to get in touch when that's necessary."
    >
    > Or a lovely conversation ender which I've seen many an English person use to brilliant effect:  "Ah, but don't let me keep you." (even when the annoying person clearly still wanted to continue the discussion.)   
    >
    > You could say "I could see you really getting good at what you're doing someday" 
    
   


* Show the courage of being Real
    > You know what, now that I'm telling it, it's not as funny as it sounded in my head.
    >
    > All right, all right. That joke's better than you acted. Perhaps it's not. Maybe it's dumb. It could be. I hear you, man. I'm not a fuckin', genius, for Christ's sake, you know? I'm just tryin' to tell some jokes. Shit, who the fuck are you? That track is number 14. It's called "Attitude."


* Draw from immediate context to snub
    > “I hate technology” [in an elevator] “ Then why don’t you take the stairs"






----

Movie Scenes:



- [Reality Bites](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LdsaucLvRb4)
- [Kate and Leopold](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LdsaucLvRb4)

----


> “This [Liverpool team] reminds me of the Arsenal's invicibles"  
> “Except they aren’t invincibles"


> “When it comes to numbers, India wins at most things!"   
> “Like Rapists"

>  "It is England but India has more support in the stadium, and the pitch is completely assisting your spinners. Says a lot about our hospitality, right...""       
>  "Well... we let you rule our nation for so many years. I believe that's the least you can do for us" (courtesy Harsha Bhogle:)

> Where did you get your Boobs from? "Assume Its at the corner of x (“Stop talking to me”)  and y (“You can’t afford them”…)" - Amy Schumer to a heckler

----

- Sarcasm: 
    - Saying the opposite of what is clearly evident.  
    - Taboo Topics: Death, Sex and STDs. 
    - Watch every episode of Blackadder and remember Captain Black Adder's every response to Baldrick's 'cunning plans.
- Satire. 
- Relate and then violate expectations
    - Take people to a point we can all emotionally relate to. And then, BAM!, they blow it to smithereens. Once you can relate to them, they're along for the ride.
- Neologisms (e.g. Familiolect)
- Puns 
- Reincorporation: Look back instead of just forward: look for things you’ve shelved and reincorporate them.
- > The improviser has to be like a man walking backwards. He sees where he has been, but he pays no attention to the future. His story can take him everywhere, but he still has to balance it and give it shape, by remembering incidents that have been shelved and reincorporating them. - Impro, Keith Johnstone


- Imagery
- Analogies.

- Well Known Idioms
- Dialogues
- References.
    -  Have ideas and themes and thing bring the out with concrete examples. 
- or (joke) doing the opposite of what asked

- Use Snowclones and Appropriate Phrases
    > “Thanks for holding the fort. All quiet on the western front?”      
    > “This agression will not stand, man”   
    > Curse your sudden but inevitable betrayal   
    > "10 Points!” (instead of Yes)   
    > Death by X   
    > “Great Minds…. think alike”   
    > Don’t count your chickens before they hatch   
    > Everything you heard is true"   
    > Regress   
    >> Who will watch the watchman?   
    >   
    > Draw on the distinction between Idea and Execution. An idea might be    right, even if the execution is flawed    
    >> Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists   
    >>  Rationalism from rationalism   
    >> Liberalism from liberals    
  
- Use something that stands for something
>  Sadly so many people confuse egotism with self-esteem. They ain't the same zip code. 

- Paradox
> Groucho Marx provided the best answer to this question when he was invited to join an exclusive gentlemen's club and responded, "I wouldn't join any club that would have me as a member." By using humor, he both snubbed the snobs and poked fun at himself.

Repetition Based:

- Epizeuxis
    - Repetition of a word or phrase for emphasis. For example:
    - > The first rule of Fight Club is: you do not talk about Fight Club. The second rule of Fight Club is: you do not talk about Fight Club.
    - https://lifehacker.com/5715912/how-to-plant-ideas-in-someones-mind
- Start of sentence : 
    - Anaphora “carrying back" repeating a sequence of words at the beginnings of neighboring clauses, thereby lending them emphasis.
    - Some people have the temerity to say we didn’t deserve that.
    - > For the kid, whose first experience of watching a World Cup was that handballing, cheating little git robbing us of a semi final…
    > For the kid, whose second World Cup was watching England play the best we’ve done in decades at a World Cup only to have it ripped away in a penalty shoot out…
    > For the kid, who didn’t even get to cheer England on in the States because we didn’t qualify…
- End of sentence. Epistrophe. repeating words at the clauses' ends. 
    - > Wherever there's a fight so hungry people can eat, I'll be there.    
    > Wherever there's a cop beating up a guy, I'll be there.   
    > And when our folk eat the stuff they raise and live in the houses they build – why, I'll be there  

- Both start and end: Symploce
    - > "Together, we will make America strong again. We will make America wealthy again. We will make America proud again. We will make America safe again. And yes, together we will make America great again." — Donald Trump

- Epanalepsis (from the Greek ἐπανάληψις, epanálēpsis "repetition, resumption, taking up again") is the repetition of the initial part of a clause or sentence at the end of that same clause or sentence. 
    - The beginning and the end of a sentence are two positions of emphasis, so special attention is placed on the phrase by repeating it in both places. Nested double-epanalepses are antimetaboles
    - > The king is dead; long live the king.    
    - Wise men speak because they have something to say; Fools because they have to say something

Last word of preceding clause: Anadiplosis Repetition of the last word of a preceding clause. Forsyth give this example:
We glory in tribulations also, knowing that tribulation worketh patience, and patience, experience, and experience, hope, and hope maketh man not ashamed
— Paul the Apostle, Epistle to the Romans

Close repertition separated by a word or phrase. Diacope
The close repetition of a word or phrase, separated by a word or words. Forsyth says the line "Bond, James Bond" 

On Rhetorical Devices
Rhetorical devices are techniques to craft striking sentences - not by altering the content but but by altering the wording. These devices are anything but natural and were arrived at by ancient Greeks by analyzing the structures of phrases that ‘sounded good’. Listed below are few of these rhetorical devices:

- Alliteration: Perhaps the most commonly (over)used rhetorical device. It is the repetition of the same sounds or of the same kinds of sounds at the beginning of words or in stressed syllables of a phrase. Shakespeare is known to have used this device extensively. If you look for it, you’ll find it everywhere - movies, literature, marketing slogans etc.
Examples:
> "I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character." - Martin Luther King, Jr


> "And the silken sad uncertain rustling of each purple curtain" - Edgar Allan Poe
>
- Antithesis: In rhetoric, it is a figure of speech involving the bringing out of a contrast in the ideas by an obvious contrast in the words, clauses, or sentences, within a parallel grammatical structure. Oscar Wilde is known to have extensively used antithesis:
- 
> “The well bred contradict other people. The wise contradict themselves.” - Oscar Wilde
> “Fashion is what one wears oneself. What is unfashionable is what other people wear.” - Oscar Wilde
> “Immature poets imitate; mature poets steal” -Eliot
Although seemingly ingenious, Wildean antitheses are, in fact, quite formulaic:
1. Make a statement that is relatively obvious (ex. The well bred contradict other people )
2. Begin the second half in a rather obvious manner. (The wise.. )
3. Take an odd turn. (... contradict themselves. )
Roughly speaking, the formula goes something like this: “X is Y. Not X is not Y”

- Synaesthesia - is a neurological phenomenon in which stimulation of one sensory or cognitive pathway leads to automatic, involuntary experiences in a second sensory or cognitive pathway. As a rhetorical device, it’s simply one sense described in terms of another. Some common examples, that one would barely consider as being synaesthetic, include: “Harmonious colors” or “Silky voice”
Here’s a beautiful illustration of synaesthesia in writing:
“She smelled the way the Taj Mahal looks by moonlight.” - Raymond Chandler
It’s interesting to note that some sense combinations work better than others:
Sight can often be described in terms of sound: ex. ‘muted colors’, ‘loud colors’
Touch can be applied to sound. (ex. ‘gravelly voice’ )
Touch can also be applied to sight. (ex. ‘warm colors’, ‘cool tones’ )
Smells described in terms of other senses do not produce a good effect.
Anadiplosis - is the repetition of the last word of a preceding clause which conjures an illusion of logical continuity.
"Fear leads to anger. Anger leads to hate. Hate leads to suffering." —Yoda, Star Wars.
"What I present here is what I remember of the letter, and what I remember of the letter I remember verbatim (including that awful French)." —Vladimir Nabokov, Lolita
“The general who became a slave. The slave who became a gladiator. The gladiator who defied an emperor. Striking story! “ - Gladiator (the movie)
“If the soup was as warm as the wine, if the wine was as old as the turkey, if the turkey had breasts like the maid, it would have been a fine dinner.”  - Anonymous (also an example of a periodic sentence.)

- Diacope -  is a rhetorical term meaning repetition of a word or phrase with one or two intervening words. (Basic formula: ABA )
        “Bond. James Bond.” (... or sandwich your first name between your last names)
        “O Captain! My Captain!”

- Tricolon - Prose composed of three parts that are perfectly equivalent in structure, length and rhythm. The rule of Three is a writing principle that suggests that things that come in threes are inherently funnier, more satisfying, or more effective than other numbers of things. Ex: “Eat, Pray, Love” (Examples from Bollywood: “Pyaar, Ishq aur Mohabbat” “LSD” )
In comedy, it is also called a comic triple. Two is the smallest number of points needed to establish a pattern, and comedians exploit the way people's minds perceive expected patterns to throw the audience off track (and make them laugh) with the 3rd element. Example: “Lies, damned lies, and statistics"

- Litotes is affirming something by denying its opposite. It’s a form of understatement-by-negative and it’s not without its uses. It’s closely related to a double-negative but it’s not quite the same - “Leaving no stone unturned” is not litotes because there’s no understatement there.
“The war situation has developed not necessarily to japan's advantage” - by the then Japanese PM announcing Japan’s surrender in WW2
Orwell was a proponent of clear language and attacked litotes in a little footnote in his famous essay “Politics and the English Language”:
One can cure oneself of the not un- formation by memorizing this sentence: A not unblack dog was chasing a not unsmall rabbit across a not ungreen field.

>  *FRESHERS OF THE JCR*   
>  
> I hope you're enjoying your lovely college-internal accommodation on this autumnal evening. However, as you're no doubt aware, the honeymoon doesn't last forever: next year, you can safely assume that you will be thrown out into the Oxford wilderness to fend for yourselves. That will involve picking a house or apartment, and people to cohabit it with.
While there's no pressing need to think about this just yet, it would be remiss of me not to inform you that some letting agents release their student accommodation before the end of Michaelmas Term (and the best places can disappear fast). To that end, it may be worth doing the following:     
> -  Attend our college Living Out talk, presented by Oxford SU to HMC students at **4pm this Tuesday (7th Nov) in the Tomas Halik Room**. Second years who attended last year will confirm that this was at worst mildly helpful, and at best the highlight of our Oxford experience.
> -  Talk to upper year students about their living out experiences (and if they currently have a sweet place, try to work out how you can bag it for next year).    
> If you have any questions, feel free to comment below or message me directly :)

Anaphora - consists of repeating a sequence of words at the beginnings of neighboring clauses, thereby lending them emphasis. Politicians love this device -
“You and I, as citizens, have the power to set this country’s course. You and I, as citizens, have the        obligation to shape the debates of our time -- not only with the votes we cast, but with the voices we lift in defense of our most ancient values and enduring ideals. “ - Obama, Inaugural Speech, 2013  
“We shall not flag or fail. We shall go on to the end. We shall fight in France, we shall fight on the seas and oceans, we shall fight with growing confidence and growing strength in the air, we shalldefend our island, whatever the cost may be, we shall fight on the beaches, we shall fight on the landing grounds, we shall fight in the fields and in the streets, we shall fight in the hills. We shall never surrender.” - Winston Churchill

The bottomline is that patterns are great - whether in a clause, a sentence, a paragraph or in an extended piece of writing. Patterns that are not easily discernable are even better.  

Let us now dissect some of Sharath’s writing:

“If you wish to become a better writer you must write every day, and if you wish to become a fiction writer, you must write fiction every day. Thinking about your novel is not writing. Plotting is not writing. Character mapping is not writing. Only writing is writing. And the more you will write, the better you will get. It is that simple, and it is that hard.”  Notice the rhetorical devices at work? ( Anaphora, Epiphora, Antithesis.. )

And here’s another example:

“‘Come in,’ I say. The knob turns, and in walks Bade Bhai. Even with bees buzzing inside my head I sit up straight. This is not just another rich asshole. He’s the asshole of all assholes. He flicks the cigar into the corner. Lets the door slide shut. After the click, he waits for a moment. Holds his gaze. Blinks. Then smiles. It’s the smile I’ve seen on the faces of thieves, child molesters, murderers, politicians. A smile of love. Compassion. Brotherhood.” (Alliteration? Anadiplosis? Tricolon? )

On Images in Writing
There’s not much to be said about images in writing (partly because I’m running out of time) except that they work best when they carry symbolic weight, when they appeal to our senses, when they’re not too elaborate and when they evoke an emotional response. The short story - ‘Symbols and Signs’ by Nabokov is a treasure trove of symbolic images –

“A few feet away, under a swaying and dripping tree, a tiny unfledged bird was helplessly twitching in a puddle.”

“As she looked around, trying to hook her mind onto something, it gave her a kind of soft shock, a mixture of compassion and wonder, to notice that one of the passengers—a girl with dark hair and grubby red toenails—was weeping on the shoulder of an older woman.”

“Across the narrow courtyard, where the rain tinkled in the dark against some ash cans, windows were blandly alight, and in one of them a black-trousered man, with his hands clasped under his head and his elbows raised, could he seen lying supine on an untidy bed. She pulled the blind down and examined the photographs.”







Chiasmus (and its special case antimetabole) he repetition of words in successive clauses, but in transposed order; The main difference between the two is thatantimetabole will reverse the EXACT SAME words in the sentence, while chiasmus will reverse grammatical structure, not necessarily with the same words. 

"Eat to live, not live to eat."

Hyperbaton
Changing the logical order of words in a sentence. As an example, Forsyth cites Richard Lovelace's line, "Stone walls do not a prison make" when the more natural wording would be "Stone walls do not make a prison", adding that in any case the statement is "factually incorrect".



Hendiadys: the expression of a single idea by two words connected with ‘and’, e.g. nice and warm, when one could be used to modify the other, as in nicely warm. For emphasis an adjective-noun form is replaced by a noun-and-noun form. As an example, Forsyth writes, "So instead of saying 'I'm going to the noisy city' you say 'I'm going to the noise and the city'".



As a Liverpool fan I am so pleased that Jordan Henderson is having a great world cup, providing the glue and solidity.
Sir Southgate needs to have a strong word about focus and cool minds.


Transferred Epithets


An epithet is an adjective or adjectival phrase that characterizes a place, a thing, or a person that helps make the characteristics of this thing more prominent. These descriptive phrases can be used in a positive or negative way that benefits the orator. "It will generally happen, that the Epithets employed by a skillful orator, will be found to be, in fact, so many abridged arguments, the force of which is sufficiently conveyed by a mere hint; e.g. if any one says, 'We ought to take warning from the bloody revolution of France,' the Epithet suggests one of the reasons for our being warned; and that, not less clearly, and more forcibly, than if the argument had been stated at length."[12] With persuasion being a key component of rhetoric, it is rational to use epithets. The use of persuasive wording gives leverage to one's arguments. Knowledge along with descriptive words or phrases can be a powerful tool. This is supported in Bryan Short's article when he states, "The New Rhetoric derives its empiricist flavor from a pervasive respect for clarity and directness of language."[Rhetors use epithets to direct their audience to see their point of view, using verbal forms of imagery as a persuasive tactic.
Orators have a variety of epithets that they can employ that have different meanings. The most common are fixed epithets and transferred epithets. A fixed epithet is the repetitive use of the same word or phrase for the same person or object. A transferred epithet qualifies a noun other than the person or thing it is describing. This is also known as a hypallage. This can often involves shifting a modifier from the animate to the inanimate; for example, "cheerful money"and "suicidal sky".
Orators take special care when using epithets as to not use them as smear words. Orators could be accused of racial or abusive epithets if used incorrectly. 

Isocolon
Tricolon A sentence composed of three equal parts. Forsyth cites France's motto (Liberté, égalité, fraternité).



Incorrect:


Catechresis: The grammatically incorrect use of words for creative expression.

Non Rhetorical:

Eggcorn
Malapropism
Mondegreen
Spoonerism


Contrast:

The well-bred contradict others. The wise contradict themselves.
Sex alleviates tension. Love causes it.
Exercises


Imagine the trailer of the movie based on your imaginary novel
Pick up a particularly riveting scene from that trailer. 
Write a paragraph or two about that scene or that image in the most stylistically appealing manner you can. 
Write a piece incorporating the image and based on a theme, both given as prompts -  
Prompt #1 : A theme for crafting your memorable piece of prose -
Death, Love, Peace, Anxiety, Nostalgia
Prompt #2: An image - A red balloon, a pickle jar, an empty classroom at dawn, a large pus-filled cyst, a blind Barbie.
 
Exercise 2:
Choose an image of your choice and write a piece based on the theme and the character given as prompts.
Prompt #1: A theme for crafting your memorable piece of prose -
Birth, Hatred, War, Serenity, Wanderlust
Prompt #2: A character
A childless man in his sixties, a precocious pre-teen girl, an unmarried librarian in his thirties, a domestic long-haired cat, a middle-aged woman in her seventh month of pregnancy

(Prompts to be numbered from 1 to 5 - combinations of prompts for the exercises would be - Death + A Red Balloon, Wanderlust + a middle-aged woman in her seventh month of pregnancy etc. )



[“Elements of Eloquence” by Mark Forsyth](https://www.altalang.com/beyond-words/thats-dame-walked-language-film-noir/)


