---
layout: post-journal
title:  Larissa
date:   2023-07-28 23:46:11
tag: 
categories: love
permalink: /larissa

---

Date: 5 December 2023, Time: 7 pm - 10 pm

Event: Oxford10 & Cambridge10 joint Xmas social 

She was on the end of the bar away from the entrance, speaking to another guy who looked to be of South East Asian origin, potentially British Indian. "One of the wholesome ones" is how my mind registered her presence as I continued mingling with others.

About twenty to thirty mins later...

I am with a Romanian CS grad. We have chatted a bit about career and life, the conversation had become stale, and we consider joining up with others. We scan the room. "Who do we join? How do we join?" he asks me, like an earnest, good-natured but socially awkward living up to the software engineer sterotype.  

I glance to my left. A group of three well dressed modern women, closed group, closed body language, in animated conversation with each other. Probably not welcoming. 

I see two women approach the bar. One of them is her. "Come with me", I say to my Romanian friend, with the air of the man who knows what he's doing. We walk up. 

"Hey, I don't think we've met?"
"Hi I am Larissa"
"I'm Piyush"
"And you? " I turn to the other one
"I am Larissa"
"Hang on..."

And so it started. Both of them were Larissa, and they'd just met as well. We walk away from the crowd at the bar and form a group of four. 


"So I was in a class and the professor asked us "What does it mean to be human?"...what do you guys think?" she asks the group.

We chatter about. The discussion moves, as all do at some point in the times we live in, to AI and its impact.

The Romanian guy also has a party discussion prompt that he has been carrying. "What would you do if money were no object?" He asks the group.

Larissa would continue working in the field of work work she is in (international mitigation in human rights law), but she would choose the cases she would work on. 

"What would you choose?" I ask her.

She seems taken aback, in a pleasant way, as if not prepared for that question. "That's such an interesting question." She sorts it out in her head in a jiffy and says "I would work on eliminating the death penalty".

The discusion moves on to death penalty and whether it can be justified. She makes the argument, one she heard from a professor, that it is 



------














