---
layout: post-journal
title:  safety
date:   2023-10-23 19:46:11
tag: 
categories: hundred
permalink: /safety


---

Who do I feel safe with?

* Clare Spooner, Francesca, Becky, Claudia
* Debbie, Caroline, Carol, Ginta
* Andy
* Tommy, Alex
* James Dunce, Yuhang, Liam McKnight



What does safety feel like?

* I can make mistakes and they would help me lovingly
	- Examples where I feel this: Claire on being undertaken while driving, or driving with slippers on, or on spilling wax
* I would not be judged. 
* I would be told the truth, not rescued or pleased.  I would be given feedback compassionately.
	- Where I felt this: When Clare took the perspective of Stephanie, said the mobile phone is rude, or the thing about smell, corrected me with my accent. When Kamala gifted me a natural perfume, she said she did it because she cares.When Becky corrected me for my accent.
	- Where I do not feel this: Francesca, Helen
* I feel I can be myself and share anything. And that all of me would be accepted, not just parts. 
	-  Where I do not feel this: Philip Zelter, Ekansh Mittal
* When I receive from them, I do not feel it comes with an expectation. When I give or am asked to give, I do not feel I am being taken for granted. 
* I don't experience fear of abandonment. When they leave, there is reassurance. If I communicate, I am responded to. 
	- Clare's communication post LT1, her support for the police case
* I don't experience fear of being too much. 
	- Becky, Debbie replies to all my messages and always appreciates more
	- Where I feel this fear: Helena
* I feel my gifts are appreciated and validated, rather than ignored -- especially when its scary to put myself out there. 
	- Andy's acknowledgement of my meditation, and of my shares on whatsapp. 
	- Debbie's feedback of my standup, and of my conflict resolution with Pranath. 
	- Where i do not feel this: Ekansh Mittal
* I feel seen.



Why
* A sense of respect (No fear of being taken for granted)
* They take initiative to reach out (Andy) (No fear of inequality)
* Curiosity, not assumption/projection
* Good communication around Separation and follow up (No fear of abandonment)
* Tolerance for mistakes (Clare with driving, Francesca with boundaries)

Fear is gone:
Fear of being taken for granted (by requesting for consent for even for small things), fear of making mistakes (by laughing them off), fear of not being good enough (by reassurance and validation), fear of inequality (by initiatives, and not rescuing), fear of abandonment (by communication


Who do I not feel safe with?

* Joanna, Helen, Sophie
* Zephyr, Elke, Ross, Sarah, Mary
* Rob
* Rich, Neil, Pranath
* Lukas (football)
* Richa

Why?
* Fear of judgement (Joanna, Zephyr, Elke)
* Fear of being pleased (Helen, Francesca)
* Fear of abandonment (Mary, Neil)
* Fear of making mistakes (Sarah, Lukas, Peter)
* Boundaries are not okay (Richa)
* Fear of being seen as less or not Good Enough (Rich, Rob, Sarah, Pete)
* Fear of being taken for granted
* Fear of being rescued (Pete)



Hamed: What can I do to make you feel safe (to say No, for example?)?

Bjorn Eric: It would really help me to go slow

Boundaries and Safety



-  consent for the asker https://twitter.com/phallusoraptors/status/1498211392331010048
	- I dont have to communicate everything. Having to communicate everything shows less knowledge of seeing, just like checking every boundary shows the other person that you dont see them. 
	  vs
	- Err on the side of asking about boundaries: Erring on the side of asking for permission always works: "Would you be comfortable texting?" rather than assuming one way or the other. If i assume too much, I might signal i am not good at boundaries, or am intrusive. If I assume too less, I might miss out on connection where possibility of connection exists. 
		- May I hold your hand?
		- Would you be comfortable talking about sexual matters?
		- Would you be open to texting?
	- I conjecture that A charging in head-first with maximum energy doesn't trigger in B the boundary of "I don't want to be around you" or w/e so much as it triggers the boundary of "I can't play this game if you're not giving me space to remain connected with my boundaries" vs Male Flirting: https://twitter.com/ElodesNL/status/1326508647132917761
- Women worry about men's boundaries because they project their own conservative boundaries. So one needs to communicate that its okay to do X, Y, Z, that you want it, enjoy it.

Safety and Relaxation is not just about "not-violating boundaries" in the negative sense, but about respecting them in a positive sense. 
- Claire' example, of where the other responded to her boundaries by saying "You always have your No's" is an example where boundaries were not violated, but they made the partner feel unsafe. 
- Reassure them that you're happy about their boundaries, not upset
- Lesson from Jo: If you are really not happy with some aspect of your partner's boundaries, talk about it in a very respectful, compassionate manner. Dont joke around it, dont be passive about it. 
- I'm usually suspicious of ppl saying "if you're worried about X, you're probably *not* X"...but I think in the case of guys (?) worried about having bad interactions with women, it's usually right

-----

“Yes means yes, no means no” = solid baseline
“No can mean yes” = potentially sexy, but it’s rape if you’re wrong
“Yes can mean no” = uh oh, like retroactively?
“Only yes means yes” = you’ve probably missed an opportunity
“Only no means no” = you’ve probably assaulted someone

Many modern consent frameworks view consent as a binary and static thing, where boundaries are set once and then remain true, and may not be probed again, until the setter explicitly re-sets them. Moreover, they emphasize getting clear yeses and assuming no’s so long as an explicit yes has not been gained. In these ways, these frameworks fail to track reality in a number of ways, robbing men of good and fair ways to fulfill their masculine roles. 
- Firstly, it is not the case that boundaries are static; rather, they are deeply dynamic, and what was a no five minutes ago, may be a yes now. It is important that men get to check this more often than once only, and indeed that men get to prompt women to check this for themselves, lest they forget to check. 
- Secondly, explicitly agreeing to sex can on a felt level often seem equivalent to explicitly taking responsibility for it, which many women, given how much they value deniability, simply do not enjoy. For many women, much of the value of sex lies in being able to surrender responsibility to men they can trust with it, not to own it themselves. Thus these frameworks make it harder for men to pursue sex they otherwise could have gotten with legitimate, albeit implicit, consent. 
- Thirdly, it is extremely common for the lack of a clear yes, and indeed what would be a clear no if the woman were pressed to be explicit about it right away, to be consensually turned into a yes anyway. For example, even in healthy, happy, long-term relationships, many women need foreplay to go from “you can kiss me” to “you can fuck me”; requiring clear yeses at all times, and especially requiring that men don’t try to turn ambiguity into yeses, would in practice render much heterosexual sex impossible, even sex that women genuinely enjoy when they do have it, and which they afterwards are happy to have had. 
- Fourthly, many men find it difficult to own their own desires this explicitly themselves, particularly when they’ve not had much sex yet and are still in the process of growing their sexual confidence. 
- Fifthly, some women gain much sexual confidence from seeing a man desire her so much that he’d push through all of the rejections she puts in his way; explicit consent norms make it much harder for men to successfully flirt with women who like to play this way in flirting. 
- Sixthly, many women find a model of explicit consent deeply unsexy; thus telling men it’s rapey not to check for explicit consent, may well lead to men who want not to be rapists getting less sex, and men who are fine with being rapey, being (on the margin) more successful in getting sex. This is an awful incentive structure. 
- Seventhly and finally, verbal consent can be given without being meant, or it can be given without an understanding of what is being consented to. In this sense it can give men a fake sense of safety, leading them to think they are treading on ice thicker than it really is. It’s easy for men who rely too strongly on explicit consent, to disconnect from the actual in-the-moment experience that their partner is having; this can lead to less embodied and less emotionally safe sex, which both men and their partners suffer from. All in all, men deserve a framework that better accounts for their role and their responsibilities, and which better integrates women’s actual, real-life sexualities

