---
layout: post-journal
title:  embodied awareness
date:   2023-10-23 19:46:11
tag: 
categories: hundred
permalink: /embodied

---

Pattern:

I have to be somewhere, where I desire something.[^event] To get it, or to manage the anxiety, I have to be someone - a certain way. So the thought goes. 

[^event]: For example: an interview, a date or a networking event. 

I could be :

* spiritual, like a stoic monk.
* generous and giving, as if I were in service.
* a coach or a mentor, full of discernment and life lessons 
* follow rules of behavior: about yes/no, needs, wants and boundaries. the "right" way to be, the "right" thing to say
* Nice Guy
* speak slowly, clearly, lovingly and positively
* outspoken and attention-seeking.
* "in my power": outspoken and status seeking, as a way of channeling eros.
* playful and humorous, as it provides comfort, flexibility and makes others feel safe.
* try and focus on externals: as in the improv exercise, as a way of maintaing presence.
* create fun

-----

The Problem: This leads the mind to create a layer betwen your real self and direct experience.

To effectively pretend to be a certain way, you have to really believe it, or be aware of it. You need your mind to create an image or rule and then control you into fitting that. This impedes any access you might have to how you actually feel. So you live in a fake world, a world “above”, and have no connection with the below. 


This is what the feedback "you need to let go" refers to. The mind's attachment to an image. The control of feelings. 


-------


Antidote: Embodied self-awareness.

How to be more embodied? movement, dance and deep breathing

self awareness: What are you noticing, within and outside?  thoughts, feelings, senses, energetic awareness of other people, of the room. 

This is no easy practice. 

* stay attuned to my own inner (thoughts, feelings) experience 
* stay attuned to your outer experience: listening to others on a feeling and energy level and responding , reading the room and the energy in the room, noticing details
* seek the touch of the beloved in every moment's happening: make love to every moment

-----

Sutra:

```
There is no image you can hold
No thought you can think 
That encompasses the Great Self

Your essence
is immortal and unchanging
Yet it is the foundations for all that moves

Rest in the shimmering emptiness
That is the source of the world
And remember who you are
```

----

Practice: Flow of Being
