---
layout: post-journal
title:  on people pleasing
date:   2023-10-23 19:46:11
tag: 
categories: hundred
permalink: /pleasing

---

Pattern:

I want someone to like me. If someone doesn't like me, I want to do things to make them like me.   

-----

The Problem: 

* A connection is not your sole responsbility: it is carried by two. There is a division of responsibility. By fixing a connection, doing all the work, you're taking on their responsibility for them.  
* To do things to get someone to like you is manipulative: it has an agenda "to get". 
* Treating someone “too well” dehumanizes them too, the secret is to treat them as a human being, as themselves, worshipping only their autonomy, because in their autonomy also lies your own. a man is doomed if he compromises himself to please someone and grovels at their feet and loses touch with his inherent worth. but he’s not doomed. he just has lost a part of himself that is important to hang onto to be whole. and he can easily get it back also. No need to be concerned w treating a healthy integrated person too good. need to be more concerned w treating yourself good enough. loving and honoring yourself. your needs. your feelings. your intuition. you can’t treat a healthy woman “too good” and lose. you only lose when you lose yourself in favor of winning/getting something from her. the problem is that when one of you is unhealthy, you have to play all these power plays that block real connection. bc insecurity is that your value hinges on whether someone wants/desires/is sexually pleased by you, and as soon as you have that you feel superior about it. which causes you to dismiss them or feel you have power over them and it’s not fun anymore

and that’s all emptiness talking, looking outside to feel your power rather than seeing and cultivating it from the inside through your relationship to yourself and what’s beyond self

-------


Antidote: 

* Do NOT take on responsibility for what is NOT your responsibility.  Taking responsibility for things that are not yours to own is a form of appeasement, which can happen when a Man is intimidated by a Woman and wants to make her anger or disappointment go away. Do not allow yourself to be blamed for agreements that were never made and expectations that were not communicated to you clearly. Let her know that you love and cherish her, but that kind of stuff is not going to fly with you.
* We put a disproportionate emphasis on the other person’s experience. We think: Am I interesting enough?
* - Learn to take accountability for and apologise for what IS your responsibility. 
	- That sounds like this: "You're right, I did say I would do it, and I didn't do it. That would be frustrating. I'm committed to doing things better." Keep in mind, if you are having to do this a lot, it may mean you are saying you'll do things you have no capacity or intention to do. Pay special attention to Steps 1 and 2 in this list. 
* Trust isn't built by being nice and accommodating all the time. It's about having standards and boundaries that are consistent, and which offer someone a blueprint on how to love you well and treat you with respect’.
* - Learn how to validate people's experiences & emotions. 
	- This means when people have emotions, instead of trying to fix them and make it go away - you can actually just BE with them. Allow. Acknowledge. Validate. Say things like "it makes sense that you're feeling how you're feeling." Remind yourself that it's not your responsibility to make other adults happy. As an adult, it's her job to learn healthy communications skills to communicate with you if she needs something from you besides just listening to her and being with her. And if she chooses not to learn, stop enabling that lack of self-responsibility.

- What are they thinking? 
- Did I say the right thing? 

These are not the questions to ask. 

My approach: go inward

- How do YOU feel in connection with this person? Check your body’s signals. 
- Does this person energise you? 
- Do you feel safe in connection with this person? 
- Do you feel grounded? 
- Is your breathing shallow or slow/deep? 
- Do you feel seen, heard?