---
layout: draft
title:  Roots
date:   2014-05-11 23:46:11
tag: 
categories: essay

---




With a little jab from his forefinger, Yossarian set the globe in motion. As the earth rotated, he looked on dreamily, head resting on the chin. It had become his favorite pastime during the summer vacations. When the globe would stop, he'd pick up a random country


By ten, like any other ten year old, Yossarian dreamed of grandeur. Once fully grown up, he's be crossing the oceans and conquering far-off lands. He's be on top of mountains giving sermons to hordes of lesser mortals. He'd be sought after for resolving interplanetory disputes. He'd be the foremost authority on philosophical questions related to life, universe and everything. Like any other ten year old, he dreamed of being God. It was the same instinct which draws children to superheroes, limitless and unadulterated by social insecurities, shadows of mortality or world-weariness.







I was born in Chandigarh, a city on the foothills of Himalaya which India's first planned city post-independence, and is renowned internationally for its architecture and urban design. The city was commissioned by Nehru to represent the newly independent nation's modern, progressive outlook.

Both my parents were born in Punjab. Their families were 'refugee' families; they hailed from a region which ended up in Pakistan after the partition of India in 1947.

My dad's family lived in the district Dera Ghazi Khan in the former province of British Punjab. The partition had seen the Muslim dominated western part of Punjab go to Pakistan, and the Hindu Sikh dominated eastern part go to India. 

Many Hindu and Sikhs lived in the western parts (including my grandparents), and similarly Muslims in the east, and the partition resulted in  displacement of millions and much inter communal violence. My maternal grandparents were married off in their early teenage, for fear of Muslim raiders. 

I shiver when they recount the stories of those times, of how they narrowly escaped death, of trains full of corpses, of wailing families, of pain, separation and longing.

The partition left the Indian state of Punjab capital-less (Lahore went to Pakistan), and that kick-started the creation of Chandigarh. Chandigarh was designed by the French architect and urban planner, Le Corbusier, in the 1950s.It eventually became a union territory, and a  joint capital of Punjab and Haryana, a state  carved out of the eastern portion of Punjab in 1966.
My parents moved to Chandigarh immediately after their marriage  (my dad was offered a job as a landscape architect in a semi-government organisation in Haryana). He has worked in the same role ever since, for 28 years,  though he has been promoted to a very senior position and changed offices multiple times. He's supposed to retire this year. My mom took up a teaching position in a government school around the same time, and has since then risen through the ranks to take up a prominent position in Punjab's education department.











rural areas, working parents, India's liberalisation, Khalistan militancy, grandparents being married off earlier etc.


