---
layout: post
title:  "Principles"
date:   2014-05-11 23:46:11
tag: 
categories: essay
---

A friend once remarked that it would have been nice if there were axioms of life - things which held true no matter what, much like axioms of mathematics. I reflected on it a bit - axioms of life do exist - infact, entire different axiomatic systems for life exist (much like mathematics). We call them religion.[^example][^religions]

In any case, I prefer *guidelines* or *principles* or *things-to-keep-in-mind* to the term axioms. 


- For a leader, it is essential that he always maintains an aura of infinite depth. To show your own boundaries pins down exactly what you are, no more, no less. It humanizes you to the point that people think you are one of them - which does not bode well for you to lead. People want to be led by someone who they perceive to be better than them in a black-box sort of way. Being opaque gives the impression of a black-box - you never know what it has the potential of producing - how much the talent extends has a reasonable degree of ambiguity about it.

[^example]: The axioms of a religion - things to be assumed true no matter what, forms their very essense. A typical axiom might take the form of commandements, or might be something general like *jaisi karni waisi bharni* (As you sow so shall you reap).

[^religions]: Ofcourse, it would be much more convenient if were to acknowledge that axiomatic systems are just that, and realise that axioms are supposed to be more like assumptions than objective truth, and and that one system is not superior to another by any objective measure.

- Decisiveness: Dont retype, dontcorrect. You’re always right, even when you’re wrong.
- 

