---
layout: post-journal
title: Lead
date:   2019-03-21 09:00:11
tag:  
categories: guide
excerpt: 
permalink: /lead
comments: false

---


> Isn’t it a neat feeling when you’re introduced to a coworker’s kids or spouse? For a moment, the bubble of work is burst. You imagine baseball games, music recitals, anniversary dinners. I remind myself of this when I get frustrated at people.

> "One day, a sign appeared on a soda fridge in RedWest saying something to the effect of, “Did you know that drinks cost Microsoft [ed: millions of dollars] a year? Sodas are your perk at work. Don’t bring them home.” This depressed me on too many levels to enumerate, but I’ll toss out a few: Someone had enough time to get these signs professionally printed and affixed to our fridges. It was someone’s salaried, 40-hour-a-week job to do things like this. Someone thought soda smuggling was a big enough “problem” at Microsoft to draw attention to it. How much soda can a person steal? How much does that same person cost the company per hour in salary and benefits? Our most interesting profits will come from capitalizing on huge opportunities, not from micromanaging costs. I’m sure some finance person will lambast me for this, which would only further depress me. Believe in our upside. Focus on our upside. We used to get Dove Bars and beers all the time. It felt like free food was on offer at least once a week, usually with a pretense of some small milestone to celebrate. Why did we cut stuff like this? (I know the boring fiscal reasons why. I’m asking the deeper why, as in, “Was it worth the savings? Is Microsoft better now that we’ve cut these costs?”)"


> I have known many talented people throughout my life; Olympians, Musicians, Mathematicians, Activists, Entrepreneurs and Scientists. But for this question, one person stands out for his leadership abilities. His name was Graham Balch.  When I was 24, I spent a time living and volunteering in hurricane ravaged New Orleans.  
It was a life changing experience. We were working in horrendous conditions. Our volunteer centers were inside abandon schools, homes and buildings. We self organized systems of feeding, protecting and taking care of ourselves, without any real government or organization superstructure supporting us. An endless stream of people were flowing into and out of the volunteer center; criminals, hippies, drug addicts, homeless people, ministers, retirees, residents and students. There was political fermentation; debates every night about what should be done to NOLA, how it should change. Some of those volunteers did more harm than good. Some just sat around doing nothing. People organized political protests and the national guard was sent in to keep the peace. 
Amidst all of this, we would organize crews to do backbreaking cleanup work of clearing peoples homes. We did this work for free because residents could not afford the tens of thousands that it took to gut a home. Everyday a crew of us would suit up and travel out into abandoned public schools and homes to do free gutting work. We worked in the sweltering heat, suited up in Tyvek suits. We went into mold infested, bug infested homes to clear out the mold. 
It takes a crew of ~10 people two days to clear out a home. The first thing you do is shut off the power, open all the windows and duct tape the fridge shut. The fridge is toxic. The food has been sitting for weeks in the hot sun, mixed with oil and floodwaters and probably has liquefied into black waste. You pull it out at your peril. After this, you pull everything out of the home and put it on the curb for FEMA to collect. 
You trash people’s baby photos, wedding dresses, their cupboards full of food, you pull out their memories and dump them on the street. You find cockroaches, baby mice and spiders. 
In the midst of all of this, I met a real leader named Graham Baulch. Graham was sent to New Orleans by the Boston Consulting Group in an effort to clean up the schools. He was coming off a MBA at UPenn and a stint in the peace corp in Guatemala. We were having problems keeping people motivated, and organized. There were lots of strong willed people in this environment - lots of fighting, lots of debate and no money to motivate people. We were several months into the effort and dealing with a lack of tools, resources, people, organization and criminal issues. Graham got us organized. I was impressed. He: 
    * Helped coordinate efforts parents, teachers, church groups and volunteers in the clean up of more than 16 public schools. 
    * Put his own job on the line, when we need supplies, tools and equipment. 
    * Stood up to contractors who were physically and logistically trying to intimidate and push volunteers out of the school cleanup. Contractors who gouged residents and FEMA out of money needed for the school clean up. 
    * Got dozens of argumentative, fighting volunteers to agree and work together. 
    * Created many more leaders and taught many of us how to lead.  
He was one of the strongest leaders that I have ever met.  He has since gone on to many great and meaningful things. 
    * Was one of the best high school teachers in the state of Georgia 
    * Was featured as a outspoken critic in the Atlanta cheating teachers scandal; where he was part of a Frontline piece. 
    * Started and ran an Atlanta charter school 
    * Ran for Georgia state senate (and lost). 
    * Served as a member of the Atlanta city council 
    * Served as an executive director in the Baltimore county school district 

----


* Think of yourself as the conductor of an orchestra. Your jobs is to awaken possibilities in your musicians. Do their eyes light up as they play their music? If not, what can you do to make it shine?

* **Learn how to evaluate what people are great at, and put them in those roles.** (This is the most important thing I have learned about management, and I haven’t read much about it.) You want to have a reputation for pushing people hard enough that they accomplish more than they thought they could, but not so hard they burn out.

> I love watching exceptional people do what they’re good at. It amazes and inspires me. I once saw an alleyway chef in Shanghai turn a basketball-sized clump of dough into hand-pulled noodles for a table of eight, amid a blur of arm movements in under a minute. Ever watch speed stacking? We each have astonishing potential.


* Leadership is the art of getting people to do what you know must be done. You can control outcomes with three types of approaches: a) People Control, where you decide who to hire, who to fire, and who to put in what positions; b) Action Control, where you tell people what to do; and c) Results Control, where you define the metrics of success. Know when to use which. You can either give goals to your team and review and track them every week or you can set audacious goals for team, pump them and become their chief hurdle remover.
    * Replace All Clear?” with “Can you tell me what you think we agreed on?”. 
    * Replace “You know what to do?” with “Can you tell me what you're going to do?” 
    * Replace “Understood?” with “Can you explain to me what we have agreed on?”
    * Replace “Everything Ok?” with “What have you been doing? What have you read? What have you written?”

-----


* **I came in every day and figured out what I could make 1% better.”**

    Alfred Lin’s description of what his job was when he was COO at Zappos. He said. Mostly I learned by failing at these things and trying to figure out, every week, what I could be doing better. In fact, I think that’s a really good meta-lesson: you have to* focus on figuring out what you’re not doing well as a founder to get better at being a founder. That’s an every-day job, and it’s subtly different from figuring out what your company as a whole needs to be doing better.
    * *Use storytelling to make your vision more compelling; not mission-speak.* What is the one thing I need to do today to help my company accomplish its singular vision such that by doing it everything else would be easier or unnecessary? In vivid detail, the document explains what Scudamore expects the company to be like in 3 to 5 years. This description includes both quantitative details (like the number of people the company will employ and how many locations it will have) and qualitative ones (like how employees will describe the culture to their families).
    The Painted Picture was paramount in 1–800-GOT-JUNK? growing its revenues to more than $100 million, Scudamore says. He recommends the following steps (http://www.inc.com/empact/this-visualization-technique-helped-me-build-a-100m-business.html) "retreat, visualize, and ask" to create your own:
    *Retreat:* First, grab a notebook and find a quiet space where you don’t have any distractions from your daily life.
    *Visualize:* Transplant yourself five years into the future. See yourself looking around at your life and your business. Imagine that you’re really in that place where the future HAS already happened. For example, if you have a five-year old child, imagine your child is now ten. Then, imagine yourself five years older.
    *Ask:* Once you’ve transported yourself to that place, ask yourself some questions that will help you “crystal ball” the future. Here are some key questions to ask yourself:
    - What is your top-line revenue?
    - How many people are on your team?
    - How would your people describe the culture of your company when talking to a family member?
    - What is the press saying about your business? Be as specific as possible: what would your local paper say about your company? What would your favorite magazine say?
    - What do your people love about your vision and where the company is headed?
    - How would a customer describe their experience with you? What would they say to their best friend?
    - What accomplishment are you most proud of? What accomplishment are your people most proud of?
    - What do you do better than anyone else on the planet?
    - Describe your office environment in detail.
    - Describe your service area. Who are your customers and how do they feel?

* **Communicate your vision repeateledly to employees**. Be passionate about your product – but also about your company’s culture and ethics. Build the compass for your company – and stick to it. If you want the folks at your company to know something (e.g. high-level company goals, product direction, etc) it’s not enough to just say it once. You have to repeat it many times and weave it into the operational rhythm of the company. At any given time, an employee at your company has so much on their plate in terms of their day-to-day job and their personal life that “that one slide in your all hands with the mission statement” isn’t going to leave much of an impression. This is something I’ve heard other founders say but I didn’t fully get it until we hit ~50 employees and observed how hard it was to keep everyone on the same page. :Executive / Board Alignment: Have  one executive read all or part of the vivid vision at the beginning of your meetings meetings with executive and board members.[Link](http://www.forbes.com/sites/richkarlgaard/2015/01/05/vivid-vision-for-success/2/). When reflecting on his own career as an entrepreneur and investor, Reid said he wished he’d published something like [The Netflix culture document](https://www.slideshare.net/reed2001/culture-1798664/37-Why_are_we_so_insistent) when starting LinkedIn.” 

 *Make easy to visualize rules/litmus tests*:
    * [UX Cliches](https://uxdesign.cc/a-comprehensive-and-honest-list-of-ux-clich%C3%A9s-96e2a08fb2e9)
    * “Regret-minimization framework.” “When I’m 80,” he asked himself, “am I going to regret leaving Wall Street? No. Will I regret missing a chance to be there at the beginning of the Internet? Yes.”
    *  “The number-one criterion was that I wanted a woman who could get me out of a Third World prison,” he says. “What I really wanted was someone resourceful. But nobody knows what you mean when you say, ‘I’m looking for a resourceful woman.’ If I tell somebody I’m looking for a woman who can get me out of a Third World prison, they start thinking Ross Perot – Ah-ha-ha-ha-ha-ha! – they have something they can hang their hat on! Life’s too short to hang out with people who aren’t resourceful.”
    * ‘If you’re not embarrassed of your first product, you’ve launched too late.’
    * "If everything seems under control, you're not going fast enough" Mario Andretti (reminding myself every day)
    * “The market pulls the product out of the team”
    * “If you cant convince people to join you for your mission, you can't convince investors to invest”
    * “Ask for forgiveness, not permission”
    * Not Every Four Years, Every Day
    * Define your company’s culture – and indoctrinate all new employees into it
    * Twitter defined a set of six assumptions for all its employees, based on humility, openness, respect, equitable partnerships and holistic vision. (i) We don’t always know what’s going to happen. (ii) There are more smart people out there than in here. (iii) We will win if we do the right things for our users. (iv) The only deal worth doing is a win-win deal. (v) Our co-workers are smart and they have good intentions. (vi) We can build a business, change the world and have fun.


* **deny anything without a clear gain** How much crucial time a founder can lose on the wrong events and meetings. Especially in France, startups are in a strong hype right now, and at the beginning I attended many such events. A few deadlines taught me the hard way that most, if not all, of those events are non-essential. On the other hand, a few of the right events in the valley (from YC and others) showed me just how efficient a gathering event should be. Finally, our advisor at our VC firm showed us just how useful an investor can (and should) be, if that investor pretends to be helping you. Now, me and my co-founder deny any event/meeting without a clear gain in knowledge (first or second order through the right connections) or investor money, that can be predicted beforehand. For example, we only meet with specialists or advisors with strong relevant connections. *Knowing this beforehand would probably have saved us several month’s worth of work in the early days.

* Founders never really agreed on who's in and who's out, roles in company, who makes decisions, expectations for time, ownership of stock, side projects, budgeting and expenses. More of a leadership problem than a legal one, but legal process, properly followed, helps ensure people understand and agree before getting started.  
* HR mistakes: Not getting employment contracts, proprietary information agreements, harassment and discrimination, wage and hour violations, immigration visa violations, not doing payroll taxes, improperly classifying employees as contractors, not doing reference / resume checks. Lack of documentation: Ignoring / not dealing with legal matters: caused by not signing paperwork, poor record-keeping, procrastination, not having Board and shareholder approvals, trying to save cost, using online incorporation services. It can be dangerous to delay turning yourself into a company, because one or more of the founders might decide to split off and start another company doing the same thing. So when you set up the company, as well as as apportioning the stock, you should get all the founders to sign something agreeing that everyone's ideas belong to this company, and that this company is going to be everyone's only job.


* **Get an executive assistant to write emails and connect with people**



* [How do you keep your team highly motivated](https://www.quora.com/profile/Brett-Fox-8/The-Real-Life-Adventures-of-a-Startup-CEO/How-Do-You-Keep-Your-Team-Highly-Motivated)
* [Empathetic Management Mistakes](https://medium.com/@brett1211/empathetic-management-mistakes-aa0fd19a37e5)
* [Why your employees are just not that into you](https://www.tlnt.com/heres-why-your-employees-are-just-not-that-into-you/)

* [Ajax:How changing incentives and focus affects training](https://www.skysports.com/football/news/11096/11009867/johan-cruyffs-vision-lives-on-in-ruben-jongkind-and-wim-jonk)
* [Newcastle](http://www.football365.com/news/f365-says-brighton-huddersfield-newcastle-believe-in-the-method-not-magic)

-----

**Marcelino García Toral**



“From the very first session, I could sense something different,” he said. “I don’t know, something. Not just him, all of his staff. The way we trained, the way they saw football, the way they worked, prepared games. It really struck me. And I said to myself: ‘I can’t waste a year of my career not working with this coach.’

Gabriel said: “The first time I worked with him, I thought: ‘What a pain this coach is!’” The first time his new Valencia team-mates worked with him, they felt much the same. “We went hungry,” said the captain, Dani Parejo. There had even been arguments with his wife, he admitted.

But Gabriel knew and, soon, so did they. When Gabriel joined Arsenal he called Marcelino, his manager at Villarreal, to thank him; when Marcelino called him back this summer he didn’t even have to think about it. When Marcelino arrived at Mestalla and spoke to Parejo he didn’t have to think about it for long, either. He had intended to leave, ready to follow 16 other players out of the club, but Marcelino made him stay.

So, Parejo got to work. They all did. Within weeks, the captain was describing Marcelino as one of the two best coaches he had worked with alongside Ernesto Valverde. 

The squad had been made manageable; now he had to manage. Although some players say the serious image is exaggerated, that his demanding nature does not make him draconian, that he engages with players, reaches them and knows how to convince them, that he is likeable, his touch light at times, that Marcelino pushes them and it works. Direct and honest, he has talked about his admiration for Arrigo Sacchi and Rafa Benítez, while Diego Simeone says he identifies with him, and Marcelino insists on a building committed, competitive team. The word Gabriel used for him is “pesado”: roughly, a pain, heavy, hard work, tough going. Intelligent and intense, he wanted a squad that he could lead and that would follow him, creating a climate conducive to a change in culture.

Some of his key men had things to prove: Simone Zaza had West Ham to leave behind; Gonçalo Guedes, only 20, barely played at PSG; things didn’t entirely work out for Geoffrey Kondogbia at Inter; Rodrigo had never scored more than five league goals; Parejo had been halfway out; José Luis Gayá, like Parejo, stood accused but was given a second chance; Neto emerged from Gianluigi Buffon’s shadow. Marcelino wanted them hungry, metaphorically. And, some soon found, literally. “We got used to it,” Parejo said.

It’s not only about the weight, although that does symbolise the seriousness and it is genuinely something that people in the game talk about. Marcelino insists that the physical condition and analysis “quantifies the footballing work; it does not dictate it” and says that he doesn’t really know anything about the physical preparation – the genius is Ismael Fernández, his fitness coach – but it is fundamental and non-negotiable. Everything starts with tests that set the parameters for the season, identifying players’ optimum statistics which are monitored constantly, with fines for those who do not fulfil the criteria daily, and they work in what the coach calls “micro-cycles” that seek to maintain that. If a player’s body fat index goes over 9.5 he simply doesn’t play


The players talk of a greater intensity on the training ground and a manager in Silva who is meticulous to the point of obsession about match preparation. It reminds of his compatriot Jose Mourinho shortly after his arrival in England, whose thick dossiers for each match raised eyebrows at Stamford Bridge.

That assessment underplays Silva’s role. If this supreme away form really is just a question of “wanting to win”, it is the manager’s responsibility to inject that mentality into the players. Silva sees himself as a facilitator rather than authoritarian.

- [Marcelino García Toral](https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/oct/23/marcelino-valencia-la-liga-spanish-football-sid-lowe)

- [Marcelino García Toral](https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/aug/28/valencia-real-madrid-marcelino-spain-la-liga-roundup), Valencia’s new manager, has a reputation for obsessing  over weight and physical condition. A pioneer, even now when professional football is catching up with him, every detail controlled, tests conducted daily, weight pinned on notice boards at training grounds worldwide, he goes further. He is so strict that stories circulate of players starving themselves or starting the day in the sauna, scared of arriving a gram overweight.

----

**Jurgen Klopp**

“Think about the passes you have to make to get a player in a No 10 role in a position where he can play the genius pass. Counter-pressing lets you win back the ball nearer to the goal. It’s only one pass away from a really good opportunity. No playmaker in the world can be as good as a good counter pressing situation.”

Mistaking familiarity and loyalty for competence is a sign of insecurity, and stunted, tunnel vision. When Moyes attempted to sign players from his former club Everton. Moyes was an insecure Manager. So is Mourinho (Matic, Carvalho, Paulo Ferreira, David Luiz). The difference with Mourinho

Top managers rarely look for signing their former loyalists (Klopp, Guardiola). They have a sense of strength, calm and security in their heads. They inspire the loyalty and following of new players - wherever they go. They look for talent, not familiarity or loyalty. Familiarity and loyalty are about YOU. Talent is about winning matches. When there is a gap between the two (like Moyes and Man Utd), you have to decide whether it is you who would fill that gap, or whether you are going to stay at the same place and entrust your former methods to work. When there is an actual gap, the latter is wishful thinking and delusion. Sometimes your incompetency extends to not seeing the gap in the first place. 

United never recovered. The players never recovered mentally, because they didn’t remember what winning feels like. It is important to remember what winning feels like - ask Federer or Ronaldo or Messi. You see a winner. in Morning or Guardiola. They eke out wins even when everything is against them. Mourinho is a narcissistic, but he knows how to play psychology. He understands the poison of self-doubts - especially how to feed it into the opponent. Klopp understands the poison of self-doubt as well, but he does not know how to avoid it. Klopp and the Choking syndrome. Seems like luck but it has has happened so many times that it is hard to see. Same with South Africa. 


- [Klopp](https://www.bbc.com/sport/football/43860388)
- [Klopp and Shankly](https://www.independent.co.uk/sport/football/european/liverpool-vs-roma-jurgen-klopp-bill-shankly-champions-league-win-goals-feature-a8320821.html)
- [Inside the managerial mind of Jurgen Klopp](http://www.goal.com/story/inside-the-managerial-mind-of-liverpools-jurgen-klopp/index.html)

------



**References**

- [How do you supervise programmers if you don't program yourself?](https://www.quora.com/How-do-you-supervise-programmers-if-you-dont-program-yourself/answer/Bruce-Taylor-69?ch=10&share=d086cafa&srid=3HW0)/)
- [42 rules to lead](http://firstround.com/review/42-Rules-to-Lead-by-from-the-Man-Who-Defined-Googles-Product-Strategy/)
- [Goodbye Microsoft, Hello Facebook](https://medium.com/@philipsu/goodbye-microsoft-hello-facebook-94a189d56830)





