---

layout: post-journal
title:  Accept yourself
date:   2019-03-21 09:00:11
tag: You're Mighty Damn Fine
categories: guide
excerpt: 
permalink: /yourself
comments: false

---


Are there things others don’t know about you that might cause them pain were they to know? Do you feel like you have to keep your true identity secret when you’d rather be yourself around the people you love? 

Am I only attracted to people who are unavailable? Am I afraid of the risk and vulnerability of falling for someone who loves me back? Maybe I am not attracted to people who love me because I think too less of myself, and I think less of them for falling for my charade and thinking more of me? 

---

> "At the heart of most of our suffering is the belief that something has to change for us to be ok. As long as the cultural narrative of deficiency dictates our behavior, we’ll always feel as if we’re not enough. Lasting fulfillment begins when our narrative changes from deficiency to sufficiency."

> "I'm always reminded of the young guy who went to Mozart and said, 'I'd like to write symphonies.' When Mozart said, 'You're too young,' the young man replied, 'But you were young when you started.' Mozart pointed out, 'Yes, but I wasn't asking anyone else for advice on how to do it.’”

> "I can remember sitting at my desk, thinking, if I only could get five employees, I wouldn’t have to code and sell by myself and I would have more time to spend with my mom. But I got those five employees, and there was a billion other things to do — like manage those five employees. While coding. And selling. So then I sat there thinking,  if I only had 15 employees... This is a big lesson I’ve learned in the past couple years — and the lesson that early founders are always shocked to hear. It doesn’t get better. So don’t delay things. Don’t keep waiting for there to be more time. I have racked up so much relationship debt, so much personal debt, so much family debt because I’m waiting for things to be less crazy. It’s never not crazy. You have to make the rest of your like work at the same time — and if you can’t do that at 10 people, you’re not going to do it at 100 or 1,000 people. I’m not saying it’s easy — it takes some reprogramming. So often you start your business as a hobby on personal time— and then your hobby becomes work, and all of a sudden you’re working seven days a week and squeezing in dinner with your wife once in a while and telling her it will get better in a year or two. I’m not alone here. It won’t get better, so you have to shift your thinking — and your work-life balance.”

> “I used to do this a lot and sometimes I still catch myself thinking it and immediately I readjust my thinking. I used to think that if I achieve Goal A then I could be finally happy or if I achieved Goal B then finally I will be in the place that I need to be. There was always something I needed to do in order to relax and finally enjoy the moment. You are the only one that can take authority over yourself, take control and realize that happiness comes from within, not from the chase of something else. Once you realize that, everything else follows. There is always a gap between where we are and where we would like to be. Learn to accept it. There is no need to run around always looking for the next validation point. You are enough now. Relax. It’s part of the journey. Stop putting your life on hold and just live.”

> "One of our great misperceptions is that we can fill an internal void with an external accomplishment. Whether it’s getting accepted to an Ivy League School, making the New York Times Best Seller list or selling your startup, the “high” from this experience will be temporary. We fail to account for what Sasha Heinz described to me as hedonic adaptation. Our standards and our reference groups change. When I got my book deal in 2015, I was thrilled. Up until that point, my reference group was people who didn’t have a book deal. Shortly after, my reference group changed. It was other published authors. Many of them had sold thousands of books and hit bestseller lists. That became my new standard for success, and the “high” wore off. Imagine that you sell your startup for 50 million dollars. You’d probably walk around with a shit eating grin on your face for a few weeks. Maybe you’d buy yourself a few toys, pay off some debt, etc. Eventually, the “high” would wear off. DHH echoes this sentiment in his article The Day I became a millionaire. Because of hedonic adaptation, being rich is your new normal. And whatever void you thought it would fill, would be replaced by a new one.”

> "Success won’t heal your emotional wounds. —  History is littered with the careers of celebrities and famous artists who overdosed on drugs and committed suicide. These are people who seemingly had everything going for them. And yet, fame, fortune, and millions of fans didn’t make up for the darkness that ultimately led to their death. Tucker’s books have sold millions of copies, but what surprised me most about our conversation was not his success, but his pain”


If I'm not happy now, I never will be.  

Sacrificing the present and living through Checkpoint.  
I operate under the unexamined assumption that there there is a destination  - a state of mind or a state of life - on reaching which I will be happier,  be more attractive to women, or have time to do what I really want to do.  This form of thinking is deluded, flawed, misguided, and what’s more, it runs contrary to all my experience. Some examples: 
* I do not enjoy programming now, but I will start enjoying it once I am more competent in it.  
* I am unable to write or work on my writing skills now, but I will be able to write when I am in a more peaceful state of mind.  
* I am not in a position to court women I like now (e.g. the artist at IHC, or the girl that ran that dog charity) but when I am richer and physically better (how much better, really?), I will be able to do so.   
If something is a psychological problem or insecurity now, they will not “magically” disappear. Worse, working towards it and being mindful of it all the time might just deepen it and makes things worse. (E.g. thinking about my weight makes me more insecure about my body) 


I give myself this excuse for not doing the work required: That I am not ‘ready yet’, and I can better spend this time ‘readying myself’. Friendships, normal life, networking, having fun etc. is ‘getting in the way’ and I can spend time better ‘readying myself’.  But in readying myself mentally, I am just wasting more time - thinking “I will do this thing" rather than doing the thing (just like in writing this whole section).”.   I pretend to myself that the work I do will some day be of long-lasting use to someone. That I am establishing the building blocks to something really meaningful.  "There’s no mythical date in the future when the conditions will be perfect. We all harbor the illusion that there will be a moment in our lives, when the debts are paid, our ducks in a row, and we’ll have the courage and conviction to pursue our wild-eyed dreams."   The next time I am tempted to be like this, I need to kick myself with the reminder:  “I know where that road leads to, and I am not going there

 I search for security in a world which is essentially uncertain and insecure. Searching for that ever-out-of-grasp security makes me all the more insecure, untrusting in myself. And What will I be like when I find it? A life secure is a life governed by fear, it is drab and boring and unfulfilling. All the fun in life is surfing on its flow, in trusting yourself and diving in. Life is a game, play it, rather than spending your time in preparation of playing it. 

> "The magical part is that the more you let go, the better it feels. The more you step into insecurity, the more you notice how secure and safe it is. Where you just stepped out of was unsafe. Everyone is so miserable because they seek security in things that are limited and always moving and changing unpredictably.” 

     If I become X, I’d be happy (X = able to write well, able to solve cp solving). “I want to skip this practice and be awesome instead” 
If it were possible to skip the practice and be awesome, then that thing would cease to be awesome. The practice is what makes it awesome in the first place.  
If you had a love potion, then love would cease to be thrilling, exciting, spontaneous. 
If you were to suddenly be able to solve math problems well, then solving math problems would cease to be seen as a “skill”, just like writing, walking etc. have ceased to be a skill. 
The hardness of the task, and the journey which takes you to excelling in it, is what gives it value in the first place - the value you seek. Remove the hardness and the journey, and the value is gone.  




----

**Have the courage to be vulnerable and authentic.** Realize that you are enough. Being average is fine. Close enough is perfect. Dare to be dull. Think "inside" the box. Celebrate the obvious. What is ordinary to you is often a revelation to others. Remember "classics" or "favorites" can be fresh ideas, too. Don't make jokes. Make sense


> Let your personality shine through

> As a founder, people just want honesty from you. They want to know about you, and they want to hear the truth come out of your mouth. 

> While it’s tempting to practice 1,000 times when you’re just starting to give interviews or pitch VCs, there is such a thing as being too rehearsed. And trust me, it sounds phony. It comes off as though you’re not listening to the other side of the conversation. You don’t seem like you’re engaged on a personal level. 

> And that personal engagement is important to investors, journalists, even potential employees. People want to connect with you, and the best way to let that happen is by being your authentic self. Show them who you are, and let go of the idea that you have to perfectly memorize and deliver every word. 

> When your personality shines through and people get a sense of who you are as a human being, they’re more inclined to like you and to help you. 

First impressions are important, and the aura even more so. When someone has a good impression of you, all your actions are interpreted in a positive light, and you have more freedom in being yourself,  since you need not be apprehensive in your actions or intent being interpreted in the wrong way.


----

Clean your psychological pipes. **If you're traumatized, or shame-filled, or resentful, you need to do everything you can to make that channel clean.** You need to floss that sucker out with therapy, and coaching, and meditation, and sleep, and running, and good food, and hot-tubs, and friendships, and just a shit ton of weeping for all that has passed down the river of your life. It takes a massive amount of courage and vulnerability to get your channel clean enough that you can be authentic.  This advice applies to everything, from talking technical with a colleague, to presenting to the board, to inspiring your kids. Practice hard, clean out your psychological pipes, and then, when the time comes, let rip on the world with your wit, wisdom, and wokeness.

Invent your own daily practices for what works. Some ideas:


- Meditation (e.g. Mindfulness, Vipassana )
- Yoga  (e.g Hatha yoga, Pranayama...)
- Exercise (e.g.  TABATA/Circuit Training/ HIIT)
- Swimming
- Improv 
- Writing
- Journaling 1 positive experience last 24 hours
- 3 New Things you're Grateful for
- Random Acts of Kindness: Open inbox to write one positive email 
- Sleep
- Good Food
- Incremental exposure to fears and anxieties
- Better friendships 
- Gestalt
- CBT

----


[Reply to ‘I’m Broke and Mostly Friendless, and I’ve Wasted My Whole Life’ by  Heather Havrilesky](https://www.thecut.com/2018/11/im-broke-and-friendless-and-ive-wasted-my-whole-life.html)


The first best way to be your own best friend is to accept who you are. You are inside your head all day and night thinking, "I'm too fat" or "If only I were better looking" or whatever. We think about our own disgusting personal habits, features or sexual peccadiloes and end up loathing ourselves because we don't measure up to some ideal that has entered into our heads from our parents, friends, TV, some article in a magazine, some humiliating failure or whatever. You have to get past that. You have to accept first who you are with all your faults and foibles and strange habits. Does that mean you should never change? No. We should all strive to be the best we that we can be. But before that we must accept ourselves as we are. No matter what you may think, no one is perfect. The best looking girl; the most buff guy; the richest, smoothest, classiest person you may look up to -- they ALL fart, pick their nose, jerk off sometimes, have brown racing stripes on their underwear sometimes and have failed at least as much as you have. Everyone is damaged in some way no matter how good, smooth accomlished and confident they appear. NEVER compare yourself to anyone else. The only one you have to measure up to - is YOU. So first you have to accept who you are. 

The next step is much, much harder. You must learn to love yourself. If you want a true exercise in humility then go right now and look yourself in the mirror. Look yourself right in the eye and say OUT LOUD "I love you". I will bet you can't do it. I would bet you wouldn't even try because it's "silly" or pointless. The real reason you won't get off your ass and do it is because you're afraid to do it. It's really hard for most people because most people don't believe it. They do not love themselves. If you want someone to be your friend then you have to be worthy of frienship and that means loving yourself first. If you are too awful to love yourself, how do you expect anyone else to want to love you and be your friend? Because that's what friendship means -- loving someone. And what is the basic form of loving someone? Accepting them. When you're with your friend and they lay a huge fart in the living room, you say, "You fucking douchebag! That's disgusting!" as the smell fills the room. But do you kick them out of the house and tell them never to come back? No you don't. You grumble at them and open up the door.  And why not? Because you accept the disgusting parts of them as well as much as their company.

So loving yourself consists of a series of positive behaviors that enhance your self esteem. 

- The first one is to you can criticize behavior -- but never yourself. stop calling yourself names when you make a mistake. Whenever you call yourself a name or say you can't do something because you are weak or stupid or clumsy or not worthy you are chipping away at that self love. Never think badly about yourself. 
- Always find a way to praise yourself. You found a pair of matching socks in the sock drawer today? Good, praise yourself. If it has to start at that level - then so be it. Start praising the good things about yourself and stop the negative shit. Your self-esteem is too critical to withstand attacks from without, which the world is full of, and from within, from yourself.

> Abraham Lincoln was often vilified when he was President. One newspaper called him a "first rate second rate man". He was a depressive personality to begin with so all that criticism must have been hard on him. But he said, "I intend to execute this Administration such that at the end of it, if I have only one friend left in the world that friend shall reside deep down inside me." He was strong enough in his convictions to reject anyone and everyone who attacked him -- except himself. He strove to be his own best friend because he was doing what he believed was right. And as long as YOU do that, success and failure are arbitrary and almost meaningless. The most important and primary thing is that in the end you love yourself.

It's hard work to love yourself. You must constantly reinforce your self love by waking up in he morning and telling yourself, "I am a good person. Good things happen to me every single day, including today. I like myself. I love myself." Start the day right. When I was a boy my mother woke us up every single day WITHOUT FAIL by saying, "Good morning Sunshine! This is the day the Lord has made! Let us rejoice and be glad in it!" But many people are not religious so they have to use the statement I gave you earlier. 
- Be Grateful that you woke up today. Around the world 10s ot 1000s didn't wake up today. They have nothing to be grateful for. But YOU DO. So start practicing and do it every day. In fact do it every single time you go to the bathroom, are waiting in line at a traffic light, are in line at the grocery store. Say it over and over. Say it enough and it will overcome all the self-hate and critical stuff you get from others. You are training your mind to accomplish your needs and your need is to love yourself first and foremost. Loving yourself is a constant effort and you have to work at. But once you do, you will be comfortable being alone -- because you will be with your friend, which is you. Practice it, do the work and be with people. It's how we were made and what we were made for. 

---

Low confidence is self-fulfilling, as is high confidence.  For me anyways, attraction has little to do with physical appearance and everything to do with confidence, passion, ambition, the stuff behind the eyes. If you believe that you're creepy when you're talking to a stranger during the day, then you are!  But if you believe that you're just an endearing, bumbling, hopeful romantic running across an intersection to take a swing at something far fetched but beautiful, then that's how people will receive you.  Your actions of whether you did what you said you would do, followed through on a promise, lied, etc, is added up into a sum total bank account called your personal integrity.   "The challenge for people today, and it is not an easy one, is to maintain high personal standards while feeling that one is living in a moral sewer."  Nathaniel Branden No one said this was easy.  There are a lot of liars, backstabbers, and con artists out there.  Sometimes you'll feel lonely.  But you will have your integrity.  And people will trust you.  And you will have no guilt.  You will feel great joy in the fact that you tell people when things bother you.  Freedom is what comes from honesty. Integrity is when your actions line up with your words and it can be a great driver of self-esteem.  But also, when you see someone who does what they say, who keeps their promises, it is an expression of self-esteem.  It goes both ways. "If I only had three words of advice, they would be, Tell the Truth. If got three more words, I'd add, all the time.” Randy also said: “Time is all you have and you may find one day that you have less than you think.” Focus on virtue and character. Don’t worry if people get the wrong impression. As long as you know, in your heart of heart, that you’re right, nothing else matters.   The cost of being immoral: Positive people can go being completely open (because they got nothing to hide - they diminish the negative/immoral and highlight the positive and sometimes even add humour. The fact that they have integrity and do the moral thing means they got nothing to hide. They accept their minor flaws and change the worst). 




----

> Assume a virtue, if you have it not.      
  That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat,  
  Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,     
  That to the use of actions fair and good   
  He likewise gives a frock or livery,     
  That aptly is put on. Refrain to-night;    
  And that shall lend a kind of easiness     
  To the next abstinence: the next more easy;    
  For use almost can change the stamp of nature,      
  And master ev’n the devil or throw him out     
  With wondrous potency.



  -----


The hidden cost of manipulative behaviour is slow decline of respect for people, yourself and a distinct lack of empathy. 

Psychopaths are very good at reading people whereas despite being well read in human behaviour. Hacks are hacks, but ultimately if you are unable to respect people, you will inevitably lose respect. 

A true leader doesn't need hacks. Never use strategies for manipulation. If you are really good with it it might work, but what is the damn point? And most of us aren’t really good if the reason is not genuine and authentic. We can all spot from a mile away when someone is trying to take something from us or sell us something. Even if we can’t put our finger on it exactly, we sense something is up. And then we are just waiting for the confirmation moment. “Aha! I knew it!” 

The best hacks are really basic. Ultimately you need to learn how to be empathetic and connect. That's much better than glib charms. The best way is to have a solid foundation about who we are, to be grounded. And this can only come from your authenticity and vulnerability. Don’t try to say things just to impress or to get validated by others.  Be vulnerable, be open, be yourself, in many cases it will disarm people because nobody is actually authentic anymore. Look at your love relationships or friends, I bet some of them are not the type of people who you would spend time with on a first glance but you care about them and appreciate having them in your life. Why? Because you know them, you know their real value. Everyone else is oblivious.




----


[How can I develop self-confidence and self-esteem? by Ellen Vrana](https://www.quora.com/How-can-I-develop-self-confidence-and-self-esteem/answer/Ellen-Vrana)

Confidence does not lie in achievements, looks or skills. Not real confidence.
There is a difference between;
1) confidence with a qualifier, e.g.,  I’m confident in my looks, I’m confident in my intelligence…etc; and
2) Overall confidence in one’s self, i.e. I’m confident in me. (aka self-esteem).

The former is specific to achievements, looks or skills that come naturally or through work. You can grow to feel confident in them, sure.  But if that is all you do, you might only be confident as long as those things hold up.  In this case your confidence is tied to that thing only, not to you.  That’s not sustainable.  

The latter is a more fundamental feeling of self-trust: no matter what life throws at you, you can handle it – kind of feeling.  
And contrary to most answers here, I think overall confidence is not simply the summation of qualified confidences.  You might be the most beautiful person in the world AND smart, but that doesn’t mean you will be confident in your self.  I think enough premature celebrity suicides have shown us that.  It has to come from another place.

The reverse, however, is true.  By building your overall confidence, it will overflow and boost confidence in other areas. It’s kinda like saying, “I don’t know how to fish, but I trust myself to figure it out.” Or, “I don’t know if that woman is going to accept my date offer but I’ll survive if she doesn’t.”   Confident people aren’t more sure about a positive result, they are just not as afraid of failure.  

This is because their sense of self isn’t tied to achievements, skills, or looks. Which leads me to my next point.

How do you improve your overall confidence? 

In my personal experience, integrity has been the main driver of real confidence. Integrity embodies compassion, generosity of spirit, honesty, reciprocal actions.  It means treating people kindly, helping others, thinking about the world around you. You can put yourself through almost anything as long as at the end of the day, you can say: I did the right thing and in so doing, I did right by others.

This is how you start to get confidence in yourself, practice integrity. If you have nothing else, have that.  If you do, you’re already better than most.

The first type of confidence is grown by surrounding yourself with shiny things. If we take that you have nothing. That’s why some people work really hard to make sure no one takes those things away. The second one is grown by actually going through the experiences mentioned above and making you understand that they are phases, that everyone is flawed and that in order to make some diamonds you have to squeeze some rocks under high pressure.
Let’s look at our two protagonists. Both are super spies. Both save the world. But one seems like a buffoon and the other one seems so mysterious and manly. And here is where your problems start:
You try to copy the image of the cool guy without ever risking being a buffoon.
And of course, why should you? When everywhere around the social media you hear about these people that just seem to have been amazing by default.


You are too busy adding shiny things around yourself aka “the perfectly tailored clothes, the perfect walk, the perfect voice, the perfect gaze, the perfect answer, the perfect comeback, the perfect advice, the perfect body, the perfect job, the perfect car” instead of focusing on trying something new, exploring, making mistakes and allowing yourself to fail, over and over again until “Embarrassment” becomes your middle name and you finally find out what works for you and who you are.

----


I talked with a friend recently who told me the following: “I hate those awkward silence breaks you have in the middle of the conversations and you just don’t know what to do or say, you want to run away before it gets, even more, uncomfortable.” Then he continued: “I wish I was more like James Bond. Have you seen how he holds his stance when he talks, how he pierces people’s eyes, how he always knows how to lead with the wittiest arguments and answers?”
This is exactly what is stopping you from being great. When you hit a certain critical moment you overthink everything x10 times. “What should I say. How can I impress? What is the most charming thing I could say? How can I give a really smart answer?”. There is always a pressure to be someone you are not, yet. You ask yourself how can you be more like James Bond when in reality you should ask how can you be more natural like Austin Powers, risk being a buffoon but actually building you into an interesting individual based on the experiences you lived instead of being perceived as perfect by social pressure.
If you allow yourself to be proven wrong, you will learn. If you allow yourself to be rejected, you will improve. If you allow yourself to goof around once in a while, you will relieve stress. If you allow yourself to make mistakes, you will grow. If you put yourself out there through the awkward conversations, the silent moments, the failed projects, the broken hearts, the job rejections, you will reach where you need to be.
You might not be the most popular kid on the block, but the quality of people you will finally end up with will be invaluable.
The coolest thing about Austin Powers is that he seems to live in his own bubble. With the ladies, he acts like he is the world’s most attractive man. Even if he doesn’t know how to use a gadget he acts like he invented it, eventually blowing something up by mistake. While being captured by his villains he always seems to have a hidden backup plan in the silliest situations.
However ridiculous he might be, he does one key thing:
He does not dis-empower himself, never.
Be weird, be different, be yourself.
There is a quote from Dale Carnegie’s book called “How to Stop Worrying and Start Living” that I really love:
“Two men looked out from prison bars,
One saw the mud, the other saw stars.”
One sees only where he is, the other sees where he could be. In order to reach the stars, sometimes you need to crawl through the mud.
I would use the same comparison to ask you this:
Which superspy do you do you want to be?
The poster boy or the squeezed rock?


-----


I have always become friends with people who I want to like me.  And.  I want people who convey ambiguous emotions towards me to like me.  I try to get the attention of people who I want to like me.  And you know what?  This is even more prevalent if people don’t immediately like me.  I want people that don’t outwardly like me to like me.  Changing people’s unclear, possibly negative opinions about me to undoubtedly positive is a stressful game that I impose on myself and have unconsciously done since I was six years old.  

It sucks.  It really sucks.  And it still happens to me everyday.  Only recently have I been very conscious of it.  

It doesn’t let you appreciate the people who like you.  If you’re anything like me, you spend a lot of physical and mental energy trying to get people to like you.  You focus on these people and not your friends and family and everyone else.  You feel anxious and nervous when you are around this person and for some reason you can’t act like yourself.   This happens with guys that I respect and wanted to impress, usually in a large group of people, and with girls that I particularly like.  In fact, the more that I am helplessly crushing on a girl and the longer the situation remains ambiguous, I might even become more awkward on a fourth or fifth date than I was on the first.  How’s that for choking?   The trick for this ubiquitous and very normal problem isn’t in getting more confident.  It’s not in getting better conversational skills or becoming more likable or acting friendlier.  I swear it’s not.  

In fact, over the last six months of my life I have basically figured out how to beat this thing. Well, maybe tame it would be a better phrase.  Because it takes practice, and if you don’t practice, these thoughts about all of the people who hate you or may or may not like you start to creep back into your head.  So bear in mind that all of this is a practice that builds on itself.  

Firstly, you need to know that you are seeing yourself through the lens of other people.  We all do this to a certain degree.  “What would so-and-so think of me if I did this”?  The people that you think of when you ask yourself this question are the gatekeepers of your life.  The thing is, they are more pervasive in your thoughts than in real life (you have to interact with their opinion even when they aren’t there).  Historically, for me, these have been people close to me that I may be embarrassed to share close experiences with.  I wanted to maintain an image of myself through their eyes that I thought that they thought I had.

I’m exhausted simply writing that sentence.  

The key to this first step is to start super-charging your thoughts to only think about yourself.  I mean this in the most un-selfish and possibly the most selfish way possible.  When you find yourself asking yourself questions like “what would so and so think of me if I do this?” try to think instead “what would I think of myselfif I did or didn’t do this?”  By acclimating yourself to think about you as yourself instead of as other people, you start to focus more on yourself.  It helps to keep a notepad throughout the day to write down instances in which you acted out of seeing yourself as you want others to see you, as well as writing down things you wish you did.  The more time you spend reflecting on what you want and the more you write it down, the more likely you will be aware of who you are doing the things you are doing for.  

The second thing – and maybe the most important.  You need to love yourself. (Just a quick note, I stole this from Kamal Ravikant even though I have never read his book.  Thanks dude!) By default I can tell you right now that you are trying to get the approval and validation of someone so that you can feel better about yourself.  Let’s look at that sentence again.  

You are trying to feel better about yourself. 

Now how in the hell does any sort of third party opinion come out of that equation?  Obviously the people close to you probably reflect an accurate depiction of who you are.  If you are honest with them and with yourself, these people can help you be even more of yourself.  At their best, that is what friends and family do – help you be more of yourself.  But seeking self-love through the form of outside opinion destroys you. 

What worked for me is for two minutes every morning I look at myself in the mirror.  Butt.  Ass.  Naked.  I repeated the phrase “I love myself”.  Now, a weird thing starts to happen.  You feel ridiculous for the first thirty seconds.  The next fifteen, my voice started coming from my pelvis.  It felt deeper.  And then my head started to tingle.  For the last minute I feel more self-accepting and more focused on myself than I ever have in my life.  I am focused on what I want to do today.  I don’t look at handsome guys and get jealous.  I don’t look angry people and feel badly about them.  

The weirdest thing about this is that everyone on the street started to feel like my baby.  You read that right.  I felt happy to look in everyone’s faces.  It was like this radiant abundance was bouncing out of my eyes and finger tips and other people even smiled at me as I walked by.  I think my posture improved.  And above all, I was focused on myself.  I am so literally full of myself that it is impossible for anyone who may have a negative opinion of me to pour that opinion into my glass of self-fullness.  I have myself.  I love myself.  And that is enough.

Finally, you need to keep momentum.  The above two things help.  They help a lot.  But you need to be doing this stuff all of the time.  When you write in your notebook “Shit, I should have talked to that girl on the metro today, but I was afraid what the people around me would think of me”, you know what you have to do next time.  You bring it to the level of conscious thinking and you are more likely to realize what you have to do next time.  And when you do it, you feel great about yourself and focus solely on you, and the opinions of strangers or people whose opinion you should never really care about starts to melt away.  When you keep doing this, you gain what I like to call self-thinking momentum.  You start to see yourself from your own vantage point, judged from the spectrum of your values (which you hopefully analyze critically).  You stop seeing yourself as the image that you give to other people, and you forget what people not close to you think.  

Paradoxically, when you focus on yourself and the things you want, you will attract the type of people you want to share with including friends, family members, and partners.  These people will have high self-esteem as well, because self-esteem begets self-esteem.  It is not selfish in the way that our society labels selfishness at all.  When you are overflowing with self-love and doing the things that are important to you, not only do you forget what peoples’ negative opinions about you may be, but part of that love starts to be too much for you to hold on to yourself.  You start spreading positive emotions to everyone around you.  

And strangely enough, when you focus on yourself, people will like you even more.



-----

- [How can one stop caring about what people say or think about them?
](https://qr.ae/TW8PjO)

I am assuming you are relatively young. First of all I want to assure you that what you're feeling is quite normal. We've all been there. I can also imagine you feel that you're the only person feeling that way and I can assure you, you aren't. People are very good at hiding it, you are probably very good at hiding it as well. More than you think you are. People develop different kinds of strategies to cope with it: avoidance, indifference, cynicism, sarcasm, arrogance, overconfidence, etc... But that's mostly just a facade. Most of the time arrogance is a facade for insecurity. Everybody, except for psychopaths, to at least some extent, wonder whether people like them or not. We are social animals, it's how we are programmed to feel and behave.

What I think is the key element in is that you should accept who you are and accept that you can't really change yourself. You can change (to a certain extent) but only on the condition that you accept and value yourself as the person you are. It's kinda contradictory that change is only possible when there's actually no need to... but it's the truth.

One thing I feel isn't stressed enough is answer is time. You shouldn't rush things. Give it time. With time you'll have more experiences in life, you'll be happy when some things work out, you'll be depressed when things don't work out the way they should. But you'll also learn that failure or misfortunes are not the end of the world. You'll feel down for some time, but one day things will clear up and you'll pick up your life again.



-----

Do I unconsciously compare myself to others? 

-  That I try to mimic or attain aspects of Helena’s characteristics might be disgusting to her the same way it is disgusting to me when I see my sister trying to mimic or attain my characteristics: The true way lies in your own being, not in inhabiting someone else’s being. Not liking yourself enough is disgusting, and adopting someone else’s mannerism and viewpoints wholesale is creepy (think: The Talented Mr. Ripley)  In the distress of comparison the troubled person may go at last so far that in view of the difference he forgets that he is a man, so that in despair he conceives himself so different from other men that he even conceives he is different from what is meant by being a man, just as the lily wasto inconspicuous that it was questionable if it was really a lily.” The philosophical cure to narcissism and envy.  No one has a clue what we are doing. That intelligent, rich, talented, goodlooking prodigy of a coworker who seems to have all figured out in life and likes to act that way? Even he is just a clueless blob of carbon and 90% water who knows zilch about why we are here, what we are doing in this planet curling a ball of fire. Even he is just a slave to some made-up story he is playing out in his head, even he is a rat in some rat race - even though he seems to be wining his. Elon Musk?  Pstt..That don’t impress me much.  I feel like I could hug him “This too shall pass. It’s okay". Even a Nobel Prize winners suffer from Impostor Syndrome. Even millionaires don’t feel it. (What does it feel like to being a millionaire? “I wish you could be one so that you get rid of the dream). How does it feel to be Roger Federer?)  What impresses me? My mother who is selflessly living for her children. Mandela.   And to think of it, isn’t this great? It feels the same to be a Roger Federer as it does to be my mother. God complex, narcissism etc. are just delusions.  


I never run for busses or trains - it was after I read about a guy who missed a train and had a random conversation with a guy on the platform who had also missed the train - this gave them an idea that they turned in a multi-million dollar business.
Confidence and self-belief is everything: don't diminish yourself.  Be always “on”.   “Hey, I'd totally regret it if I didn't introduce myself to you.  May I?” You might get one "yes" for every ten "nos" but I promise those "nos" will be immediately forgotten and if you learn to laugh it off as a natural, clumsy, endearing attempt at finding a sticky collision with someone who piques your interest for whatever the reason ~ the fear you feel will evolve into excitement

----


Consider this. If a politician has an extramarital affair, it often means the end of his career. If a sports star does, he is criticized harshly but does not lose his job. If a rock star or movie star has an extramarital affair, people respond mostly with a shrug, and the increased publicity might even provide a boost to his career. (Just reporting, not condoning).

Politicians are fragile to negative judgments. Rock stars are not. In Nassim Taleb’s terms, the rock star is “anti-fragile” to negative judgments (negative judgments have limited downside and potentially great upside).

Figure out where you stand on this spectrum in your career and in your personal life, and consider whether there are ways to make yourself less fragile (or even anti-fragile) to negative judgments. Try to set things up so you don’t have to care so much what everyone else thinks. You really can’t please everyone, so do yourself a favor and figure out a safe way to stop trying.

- [Everybody has critics by Dani Shapiro](https://www.elle.co.za/the-haters-gonna-hate-everybody-has-critics)

----

Don't be sensitive to what other people think of you.

“Nobody else is paying as much attention to your failures as you are. You’re the only ones who are obsessed with the importance of your own life. To everyone else, it’s just a blip on the radar screen, so just move on.”  

Seriously, don't even let that thought come near your thoughts. Let side remarks pass by.  People care less than you think they do. They are less critical of you than you are of yourself.  This is true about any communication really: speech, presentations, writing, exam answers, online chat, wall posts, anything.

Since INFPs tend to hide their feelings, an offender may not realize that they have saddened or angered them.  These sorts of unaired griefs may lead to resentment that will eventually cause an INFP to cut a person out of their life without explanation.  INFPs don't wear their feelings on their sleeves, but since those feelings are so tender they are more apt to be hurt than people think.  A word or act that another type might brush off can be damaging to a soft-hearted INFP.  By the same token, criticism should be approached with particular gentleness and consideration.  If possible, the emphasis should be placed upon how oneself or others are being hurt by the INFP's behavior rather than on the negative actions/qualities that are causing issues. 

Exude comfort.

---

Be the best you that you can be. Make sure you are clean, your body, your clothes, your breath. Make sure you observe the social niceties. Be polite. Listen more than you speak. All of these things draw people in. That's the first step to social acceptance. And don't EVER be desperate. 
---

Am I living in congruence with my long term goal?  Throughout the course of your life you will make hundreds of thousands of small and large choices.  You won't remember them all.  But your subconscious stores them all and adds them together.  And this forms a reputation that you hold of yourself.  To start moving in a direction that is conducive to achieving who you want to be, you must be conscious of the choices you are making, while you are making them.   Here are a few examples of making choices that go against your ideal (self-betrayal):  "I know I want a better looking body but one more candy bar won't hurt"  "I know I should read to my children every day and I'll start soon..."  "I'll start living within my means soon"  You have to start today.  Today become aware of the poor choices and go the other way.  Select the areas where it is high priority to become more aware of your choices and begin there.  Get the facts of the situation instead of ignoring them for the sake of comfort.  Once you have those facts act on them.  When you get feedback from your actions, correct your plans as necessary to reach where you want to be.   It will be difficult to look at the facts sometimes.  (e.g. adding up and prioritizing your debts)  But you can't make well informed decisions without knowing the facts. You lose respect for yourself when you make decisions that aren't congruent with who and where you want to be.  Somewhat similar to self-sabotage or self-betrayal.   For instance, if you have a goal to be number one salesman yet every evening you go to the bar, it is highly unlikely that you will make number one.  The choice of going to the bar goes against your goal of becoming number one salesperson.  This, in turn, lowers your self-respect, an essential part of self-esteem.   So when we say "Live Consciously", what we mean is bring to the front of your mind what you goals are, what you have been doing to achieve them, where you currently stand, where you expect to be in a months time, etc.   The more your choices line up with who you want to be, the more self-esteem you will have.   Making choices that move you in that direction requires self-examination (higher consciousness).  You must constantly be asking yourself questions of whether you are taking appropriate actions that lead you to where you want to be and then follow up with more ACTIONS that do.  You will feel great about yourself when you do this.  Questions like these:  "Is this action moving me closer or farther away from where I want to be?"  "Where am I now compared to last month in pursuit of this goal?"  "Am I using feedback to correct my course?”  What is it that you wish were possible? What is stopping it?  E.g. Do I need a job? (When I am starting up?)  What do I need to be at the end - and what sort of things have stopped me? 

----


Mistakes are essential to learning. If the fear of exposing yourself keeps you from making mistakes while you’re “Faking it until you make it”, you would never learn enough make it.

A mistake is an evalutation of an action. Evaluation are left to others, only the action is in your control. Thus,  fake it until you make it is a misconstrual. The better advice would be "Keep making it until it doesn't feel like you're faking it, because you actually aren't becaue there aint no such thing as perfect and there's always room for improvement”.

You only learn from deliberative practice. If you're mindful of faking it, you're not practicing the thing, but practicing faking it. 


If you learn to act like someone who is a good storyteller, you won’t be a good storyteller, but you’d be a good actor. 

Keep your sense of self and positive narrative at the back of your mind. [You’re Winner, Cool and Awesome. You love philosophy, You’re adept at Math and CS. You’re from India, and you’ve rowed crew.).

Increase Presence. Observe. Pay Attention to Taste of Food, People’s Accents and Way of Speaking, Architecture and Listen to Stories. 



* What the other person is thinking about yourself is the least of your concerns, because what you think of yourself (you love yourself!) is shining at you like a blinding sun and everything else diminishes in its light.
Don’t be nice. Be humour, present, warm and powerful. 


Love yourself. All your flaws. Don’t be afraid or ashamed to show any part of yourself to others. Learn how to deflect criticism with sarcasm, exagerration, self-deprecation, yes-and, satire. 



----

-  Many desirable states — happiness, attractiveness, spontaneity — are best pursued indirectly, and conscious thought and effortful striving can actually interfere with their attainment. [Trying not to try](https://www.brainpickings.org/2014/04/21/trying-not-to-try-slingerland/)

---

Why not to self improve?
* Rooted in delusion, "if I do this I will be happy" thinking, wherure you sacrifice the present for some illusory, elusive future.
* Rooted in self-rejection, "I am not adequate" thinking, which plants an insecurity and a scarcifity thinking, rather than abundane, focussing on your strengths. Often supplemented by comparison, envy, jealousy
* In almost anything that matters, setting a goal IS the thing that ensures you dont get to the goal (happiness, being yourself/authenticc/real, etc. see Ted talk on How to win Rhodes for dubai students)
* Compromise on Integrity, especialy if pursuit of one goal contrdiccts with another. e.g." I want to be good at writing cynical satire and ridicule those who believe X", vs "I want to empathise and make people feel validated" for being charismatic
* 

Do you really want to self-improve?

* Can turn into a charismatic sociopath (Ted Bundy, Donald Trump)
    * Lose real feelings (like guilt), authenticity, alienation from the self etc. 
* Is it possible to decide and be someone? To make a conscious choice “I’d be the, I;’d be that”. No, because whatever you little mind comes up with, will be too bare-bones, skeletal, analytical and limited. The world is expansive, abundant,changng, flowing, spontaneous. You can never capture it your little self-aware consciousness thoughts in your little minds. Which is what we mean by  “be yourself"
* Dangers of role models: copying attributes can make you 
* Dangers of narcissism
* Anxiety from chasing unrealistic ideals and never being “good enough"
- [What's it like to have attended an elite school and then be an utter failure afterward?](https://www.quora.com/Whats-it-like-to-have-attended-an-elite-school-and-then-be-an-utter-failure-afterward/answer/Marie-Stein?share=a86d3526&srid=3HW0)

- [Forget Self-Improvement](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=3605242)
