---

layout: post-journal
title: Be heard
date:   2019-03-11 09:00:11
tag: 
categories: guide
excerpt: 
permalink: /voice

---


**Who has a good voice?**

- [Matt Damon](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_UBX6LSfbUY&list=PLdIS7dENF-nWAobLPwYkEXMK083gV8qbn&index=37&t=0s)
- [Mathew McNoughey](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wM6exo00T5I&list=PLdIS7dENF-nXuG_spHpqy05J0qat1sp6t&index=28&t=0s)
- Leonardo Di Caprio
- Jad Abumrad


----

Vocal Anatomy:

* Your vocal folds are housed in your larynx. This is your Adam's Apple if you're a man, but women can feel the notch on the front of their larynxes, too. Your larynx is super-important to your singing, and whatever you're doing, an awareness of it is vital (because that's where it all comes from).
* The rest of your throat, pretty much the area above your larynx to the opening of your lips is called the vocal tract. Like any tube, you can imagine it bounded on the top and bottom by two different surfaces. In this case, the lower boundary is the tongue (which has a massive base that you can feel if you reach above your larynx to where one might have a double-chin), and the upper boundary is the pharynx (major hand-waving here, as it's more complicated, but for these purposes that'll do).

These are pretty much the big players that form the supraglottal (above the vocal folds) elements of singing.

* The natural pitch of your voice (tessitura) is largely determined by the size and shape of your vocal cords and the size, thickness, elasticity and age of your larynx and pharyngeal cavity. The larger  the larynx/pharynx, the lower in pitch and timbre your speaking voice will be. Of course these factors are outside of your personal control, very much like height or eye color. 

* The size and shape of your vocal tract is literally what determines your tone color. Some of this is innate (OK, most of it), but a portion of it is in your control. Yawn; you just felt your pharynx make space. Make a kissy face; your vocal tract just lengthened at the lips. Breathe in through your nose like you're smelling flowers; your larynx just descended. All of these things make your voice darker (and their converses make your voice brighter, though this is less effective). Singers are vocal tract sculptors. Become an expert with your clay. 

* Develop a solid understanding of vocal anatomy. Some of the most important concepts:
    *  Tone placement (where is the tone resonating?)
        -  Masking: You know you are vocalising in the mask whene you can feel vibration in your lips, in your nose, and sometimes, in your forehead. When you speak from the mask, you are resonating from your nasal and oral cavity. [Sierra Corbin teaches masking](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9xOjqnupODs)
        *  There is your head voice (aka falsetto) vs. your chest voice. Men and women both have both. See [5:30 onwards](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d6OYv2FifCI)
            *  Women tend to have much better developed head voices.  Practice has an incredible effect on its body and tone. To develop it, sing in it all the time. Every day. It's easy on the chords, so long as you don't go into the vocal stratosphere. Chances are, it'll sound terrible for a while. But then you will sound awesome and be able to sing well in two distinct vocal ranges. 
            *   There is also a break between these two voices. The muscles needed to delicately control the switch between the voices are, by default, helplessly untrained. They are incredibly difficult to train and take years to develop even minimally. However, smoothing your vocal break is incredibly rewarding and wonderful. 
            *   To exercise, just ascend very slowly from chest, transition up to head, and then back down to chest. Do this very slowly, over and over. Get to know what kinds of placements will ease the transition. It's a slow, laborious process.
    *   Support (breathing from your belly)
        -    The big subglottal player is breath. The breath mechanism is often misunderstood, and there are tons of disagreements on what constitutes proper support. Suffice it to say that people talk about these muscles a lot, but most of them aren't under conscious control (e.g. the diaphragm). That said, when you inhale, there are basically three big areas of your body that can move: your shoulders, your ribs, and yourabdominal region. Likewise when you exhale.
    *   Muscle relaxation
        -  Practice keeping your tongue, your jaw, your neck, and your pharynx (once you can control it) loose. The looser they can get, the better off you'll be. For the most part, the longer your vocal tract is, the more protected your voice will be. This is a big reason that opera singers sing the way they do, but it's just as applicable and important to every style. If you're doing something that starts to feel scratchy or weird, lengthen your vocal tract.
        -  Posture: Don’t Jack your shoulder back. Flexing your abs makes your stomach tense; we compensate by creating tension and we smash our vocal chords. 
        -  Always stay relaxed. Tensing muscles to hit high notes is unhealthy and sounds like crap.  Yawn (to release tension from your neck and jaw)
Bounce barefoot and make a tribal sound.
    *   Expression (your audience can tell how you feel about what you're singing)



-----

- Record your voice. Listening to yourself sing is some of the most immediate and blunt feedback you can get (and blunt feedback is the best kind). And don't be nice to yourself, either. There's only one way you're going to fix your vocal problems, and that's by recognizing that they exist.
   
   
----


 
- Exercise: Lob over your voice over a phone to twice the distance to speak into the phone

- Never try and force vibrato (the slight and rapid variation of pitch on one note). Chances are you'll induce a vocal wobble, tense your neck muscles, and ruin your control. Vibrato will  come naturally when conditions are right. The trick is to learn what  those conditions are. 




----

**Breathing**


70% of singing is breathing correctly.  If you are breathing correctly -- which means you are efficiently producing tone, using your diaphragm muscles properly, phrasing your lines well, and turning your entire body into an instrument -- then the rest follows.  Getting to the point where you're breathing correctly, and CONSISTENTLY, can be very tricky.  You may need to learn a lot of physical adjustments to make in order to get to the point where you're breathing effortlessly and producing tone.  The old saying holds true here.  "An expert keeps trying until he gets it right.  A master keeps trying until he can't get it wrong." 

- Wrong: Stand in front of a mirror and take a quick, deep breath in. Did you notice your shoulders shrug upward when you did that? 

- Wrong: Stand tall and shrug your shoulders up toward your ears. Hold that position and take a deep breath. Or, rather, try to take a deep breath. You can’t do it. You can take in some air, but not a lot, and what you can take in sounds labored. There’s a big whooshing sound that just doesn’t feel right. It feels weak.

- Wrong: Hunch over at the thoracic spine. Imagine you’re typing away at the computer and let your chest cave in, your shoulder blades spread out, and your head droop forward. In other words, give yourself the type of terrible posture that millions of us sport each day. Hold that position and try to take a deep breath. It’s belabored, right?

- Wrong: Suck in your gut. Flex those abs and flatten that belly. Inhale, and note how thin and ineffectual your breathing sounds and feels. Your diaphragm is pinned against your contracted abdominal muscles. It can’t go anywhere. It can’t do anything, and your breathing suffers for it.

- [Stronger Lungs For Coronavirus](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HwLzAdriec0&feature=youtu.be&fbclid=IwAR1mwJz5IgIaByj8kg54CQ38sxBB0N44ca1x1rfyVOlaMZA5Hyr_2-KLjPo)

- Inhaling:
    - Breath from your diaphragm - this will give you better tone and control, and will allow you to sing for longer without having to take another breath.
    - Lying down or standing up. Relax and focus on the movement of the diaphragm. Place your hands or lay a book with reasonable heft on your belly (this will give you something to brace against).
    -  Take a deep breath and let your belly expand as your diaphragm asserts itself. When done correctly, you will see your stomach pop out a bit when you intake air.  Your chest and shoulders may rise and your ribs may expand, but this is totally normal and expected as long as the belly moves first. 
    - Try to get the highest ratio of movement to effort in your ribs and abdominals (i.e. without a great feeling of exertion, feel a great deal of expansion in these areas). 
    - Limit movement in the shoulders. 

- Exhaling
    - Lots of beginning singers focus on getting the perfect inhale, but it's much easier to have problems with the exhale.
    -  Make sure you're not holding your breat 
    -  Make sure you don't feel a lot of supraglottal pressure building up (this would feel like you're lifting something heavy), and make sure your ribs and abdominal muscles feel relaxed and free. 
    -  Next, slowly exhale while tightening your core and contracting your abs. As the abdominal muscles contract, they’ll push the diaphragm back up. This will reduce the volume of the thoracic cavity, increase the air pressure, and expel the air contained therein. Continue to take deep diaphragmatic breaths for a couple minutes. Inhale three seconds, exhale six to ten seconds.

- Do the lip drill (Bruhbuhrbuhr sound till out of breath, increase duration per workout, do with finger supporting th cheeks) and tongue drill

-----

**Singing**

- Sing constantly, but don't strain. Sing EVERY DAY. Your vocal chords are like any other muscle in your body - they need regular workouts to be in tip top shape.  Memorize songs, sing them with and without the tracks, turn the track on at the beginning and at the end to see if your'e still in the same key.  Always sing as if you're performing.

- Sing scales, learn all the modes, not just the classical ones. If you're looking to expand your range, work those scales. Singing "ah," (remember to open wide and do it so that you feel like you're yawning) is the most effective way to run scales because it will force you to open up your throat and expand that range. Try to get just a half a step higher each day. You won't see immediate improvement here, but if you keep after this every day, you'll notice that you can easily go up an additional 2-3 whole notes (NOTE: doing this WHILE practicing diaphragm breathing will help you see progress much quicker). 

- To improve a song for performance... just feel it. You can sing a song technically well, but if there's no emotion behind it, it's devoid of something truly special. 20% of singing is confidence.  If you have confidence, you produce a strong tone, you stay in control physically, you can keep your presence.  When you lose confidence, your breathing and your physical instrument suffers... which causes you to lose confidence... which causes a spiral away from the sound you want to make.

- Teach yourself music theory
Learn some classical pieces, these help you develop a rich tone and well rounded voice. In general, the more classical the style you're going for, the more careful you're going to have to be with your voice. That means pushing much more rarely and delicately. In general, you should start singing classical, then layer style on top of your cultivated technique.

----

**Terms**

- Prosody: The patterns of rhythm and sound used in poetry. The patterns of stress and intonation in a language. These contribute to linguistic functions such as intonation, tone, stress, and rhythm. Prosody may reflect various features of the speaker or the utterance: the emotional state of the speaker; the form of the utterance (statement, question, or command); the presence of irony or sarcasm; emphasis, contrast, and focus; or other elements of language that may not be encoded by grammar or by choice of vocabulary. 

- Rhythm

- Melody A melody (from Greek μελῳδία, melōidía, "singing, chanting"),[1] alsotune, voice, or line, is a linear succession of musical tones that the listener perceives as a single entity. In its most literal sense, a melody is a combination of pitch and rhythm, while more figuratively, the term can include successions of other musical elements such as tonal color. 


- Intonation = Cadence the rise and fall of the voice in speaking. In linguistics, intonation is variation of spoken pitch that is not used to distinguish words; instead it is used for a range of functions such as indicating the attitudes and emotions of the speaker, signalling the difference between statements and questions, and between different types of questions, focusing attention on important elements of the spoken message and also helping to regulate conversational interaction. 

- Tone (or Mood). 
Intonation contrasts with tone, in which pitch variation in some languages distinguishes words, either lexically or grammatically.  Tone is the use of pitch in language to distinguish lexical or grammatical meaning,  that is, to distinguish or to inflect words. All verbal languages use pitch to express emotional and other paralinguistic information and to convey emphasis, contrast, and other such features in what is called intonation, but not all languages use tones to distinguish words or their inflections, analogously to consonants and vowels. Languages that do have this feature are calledtonal languages; the distinctive tone patterns of such a language are sometimes called tonemes /ˈtoʊniːm/, by analogy with phoneme. Tonal languages are extremely common in Africa, East Asia, and Central America, but rare elsewhere in Asia and in Europe; as many as seventy percent of world languages may be tonal.

- Stress

- Pitch

- Tempo

- Loudness

- Texture 

- Timbre (the quality that makes one sound different from another based on sound production): think of same note being played by different instruments

- Resonance

- Expressiveness and Range: 

---
**Accents**

- [Cheryl Cole's Geordie](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OHaoLNOiRrw&list=PLdIS7dENF-nWAobLPwYkEXMK083gV8qbn&index=7&t=119s)
- [The English Accent in 24 Accents](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dABo_DCIdpM&list=PLdIS7dENF-nWAobLPwYkEXMK083gV8qbn&index=25&t=104s)
- [Sooirse Ronan's Irish](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NzyN5kcbusY&list=PLdIS7dENF-nWAobLPwYkEXMK083gV8qbn&index=8)
- [Northern Irish](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o9SApeProCY&list=PLdIS7dENF-nWAobLPwYkEXMK083gV8qbn&index=12)
- [American](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JoNj0KDuDR8&list=PLdIS7dENF-nWAobLPwYkEXMK083gV8qbn&index=15&t=0s)
- [Trevor Noah in Russian](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9OB72GZOS4c&list=PLdIS7dENF-nWAobLPwYkEXMK083gV8qbn&index=27)
- [Pamela Fox's Australian](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CT7EiWYGkdM&list=PLdIS7dENF-nWAobLPwYkEXMK083gV8qbn&index=16)
- [Konnie Huq's British](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6JEetGlnOqc&list=PLdIS7dENF-nWAobLPwYkEXMK083gV8qbn&index=28)
- [Richard Ayaode](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jjC3ycS_2js&index=29&list=PLdIS7dENF-nWAobLPwYkEXMK083gV8qbn)


----

**References**

- [Change your voice](http://www.wikihow.com/Change-Your-Voice)
- [Voice Coaching, What I learned](http://blog.pamelafox.org/2015/10/voice-coaching-what-i-learned.html)
- [Voice Lessons: Vocal Vibrato (Part. 1)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ey8lZgnUfZc)
- [Vocal and Body Warm Up](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=auqxLQiT_iE&list=PL6BB9C7AAE6470D53&index=15)
- [What are the best practices for learning how to sing and improving a song for performance?](https://www.quora.com/What-are-the-best-practices-for-learning-how-to-sing-and-improving-a-song-for-performance-In-what-ways-do-different-styles-of-singing-require-different-styles-of-studying-What-concepts-do-beginners-need-to-know)
- [What Languages Sound Like To Foreigners](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ybcvlxivscw&t=0s&list=PLdIS7dENF-nWAobLPwYkEXMK083gV8qbn&index=27)
