---

layout: post-journal
title: Lessons from LT
date:   2019-03-28 09:00:11
tag: 
categories: guide
excerpt: 
permalink: /lt
comments: false

---

There is a "way of be" in the world that is tantric. 


It is non-reactive and relaxed.
It feels effortless, free, in the "flow of life", genuine, authentic, "in integrity".
All emotions are welcome, including: fear, anger, sadness (to investigate: what about "stress", "anxiety", "nervousness", "jealousy"). 
It has heightened awareness of your own emotions, your senses. 
You see reality "as is", including the emotions of others. 
You have needs, but you are not "needy". You are not in a "getting" state. 
You give freeily, but do not "give to get".
You are able to play and take risks. 


 ------

**Where Anxiety Comes From**


Often I criticize myself for not being socially savvy, for not being able to make small talk or have conversations with beautiful women. But the reason I feel uncomfortable to talk to certain woman have nothing to do with ability, but often about the cues that I have subconsciously picked up on how the other person's attitutde towards me. 

Example: After the men-women reunion, I felt comfortable talking to Sarah, Kathy, Vanese, Stella, but not with Ingrid, Katie, Rosie etc. This was entirely due on them, and nothing to do with me. All these other women had done or said something that made me feel "unsafe", "judged". This could be as little as looking away when I looked at them, or a remark, or a disconnected/dismissive response when I said something vulnerable, or something in their body language or energy. 

It might be good to bring these cues to awareness, so that I communicate.

---


But the same goes the other way: often others might not feel safe around you if you hold a judgement about them. You might not be aware of the judgement, or you might be aware but think it is private, but it is very noticable to the other. This is an example of where the energetic realm is different from the physical realm.


---

Apart from your judgements, others might not feel safe around you if you cross their unspoken boundaries. Which is why it is important to...

----

**Err on the side of asking about boundaries**

Erring on the side of asking for permission always works: "Would you be comfortable texting?" rather than assuming one way or the other. If i assume too much, I might signal i am not good at boundaries, or am intrusive. If I assume too less, I might miss out on connection where possibility of connection exists. 


* May I hold your hand?
* Would you be comfortable talking about sexual matters?
* Would you be open to texting?
* 

----

**I have trauma informed patterns**


Truth is, I was in a very different state of mind (and feeling) when I started this journey than I am now. It is impossible to recall how I my internal experience of myself used to be, but I remember the facts clearly: 

I broke down in tears after Vanese's initiation in LT1. Slowly at first, then violently when I realized that my beloved wouldnt not only look at me, but wouldnt even care for me. It felt pretty natural then, and was cathartic, but it was, in hindsight, what they call a "trauma response." It triggered all those memories of not being loved, not being cared for, and importantly, of "being abandoned". I had thoughts of "This, Again, Ofcourse", "Would anyone ever love me?", "I have to live with this pattern forever". 

I also got incredibly melancholic after the Men-Women reunion after LT1 in Florence House, after observing my beloved. Slowly at first, then back at the mattress. Mellower than the first, but this was also a "trauma response" that reminded me of all previous instances of false hope.

At the end of LT1, I spoke to Sarah about "I am not someone on the margin". It was comletely informed by how I imagined she saw me, rather than how I was feeling.

I "got back" at Rich after my initiation in LT2. At the time, I felt in my power and proud of myself. And though difficult to see, this was also "a trauma response". Was it? Although the response was informed by fear of "being bullied". it was authentic and in tune with how I was feeling. It was also controlled. What it did lack was a mindful awareness of my feeling. And it definitely lacked awareness of all the other ways I could have responded, or channeled my energy. It was reactive, it lacked mindful choice. 

Would I have the same reaction if the same series of events were to happen to me now? 

Possibly not. I have received loved by the one I so desired love from in my LT1, I was chosen by the one I desired in Florence House LT1, and I have received love from Jo. I am lovable, I can be loved, I have been loved, I am loved and I will be loved. 

Do I still have trauma informed pattenrs? 

One is the "fear of being taken for granted"

-----


**When the inner critic is active, it reads a negative statement even in positive statements.**

When J observed "you've calmed down", I received it as that she wants me to be more energetic. Whereas thats not what she meant; she wanted it slow.

When Serena started with "You have a lovely voice", the inner critic was waiting for a "But..."

When Zephyr set different boundaries for me and Andrew, the inner critic convinced me it was about me. (it was merely because she had worked with Andrew before)

When Sandra walked past in LT3, the inner critic started thinking she must have made a judgement (she just wasn't ready after having done cycles of relationship)




----


**Wheel of Consent**


An insight: an energetic transaction or exchange is not just about "give"
 and "take", i.e. it is not single dimensional. One can "take" by giving, and "give" by taking". It is two dimensional. 


How does one give by taking? By taking from others for their own needs. By "allowing" others to give. When I allow my parents to give me advice that I do not need, I make them feel valued. I "give energy" by "taking" advice. Similarly, when J served me down there, I "gave her" (energetically) by taking ("physically").

How does one take (i.e. for them, meet their own needs) by giving (on the surface)?  When I "give something" to meet my own needs (of self-esteem, or feeling good about myself e.g.). Rescuing to feel good about myself would fall toin this category. A good example is me giving an orgasm to D, with her giving me instructions. I was "giving" (physically) but it was for my needs (to learn). At the same time, D was giving me (energetically), by "allowing" me to give (physically). 

Note that when one is taking (energetically) by giving (physically), the other is giving (energetically) by taking (physically).


Okay, so those are the counter-intutive ones. What about the straightforward ones?

How does one "give" by "giving" then? When I give something to others, "for others". For example, me giving an orgasm to J. 

How does one "take" (energetically) by "taking"? When J and me did it in the morning. When S and I did it. 

In negotiations and marketing, acting as if you are "for the consumers" or "for the other party" while filling your own pockets is the norm. But when one does the same in interpersonal relationships, it translates to manipulative behavior. 

It is useful to be aware of who is one acting for, energetically, when one does something physically. 

Where does gratitude fit in?

Often when you give (energetically) to someone, there is gratitude at the other end. If there is no gratitude, the other did not "recognize" it as a gift that was for them. 

When you are giving, do you get upset when the gift is not appreciated?  When there is no gratitude? Then it was probably for you. 

Example: 

I was amused when Clara reciprocated my energy. She gave back to my giving, I imagine for a sense of equality and "not owing" gratitude. She did not "appreciate" my giving. But it did not cause me upset.  

Richa does not show gratitude (for me agreeing to meet her). How does that make me feel? Confused, awkward, because she says she wants to meet, and I do it for her.


I was upset when Rosa didnt respond gracefully to the compliment. She did not give me gratitude. The compliment was probably "for me".

 

---

**The Realm of Energetic Exchange**

The wheel of consent is a clear example of how "energy" is a separate realm than the physical realm. It is the realm of consciousness, attention and intention.  

The verbal realm is what people say. The physical one is what people do. But the energtic realm is what people's intentions and feelings are. 

Operating in a different realm: the verbal one or the physical one, one can often end up either being manipulated, or being manipulative themselves. 

When one does something differently from what they say, one separates their verbal and physical selves, and is out of integrity.

But when is out of tune with their energetic realm, and say and do differently from what they intend, one is also out of integrity. If I say I love you, and do end up loving them, but I dont feel the love, one is out of integrity with their self. 




----

**I tend to invent stories that makes me look good to myself**

* "Laura  is secretly attracted to me" 
* 


**I switch to fault finding mode when I imagine someone looks down on me**

* Zephyr lacks self-awareness (didnt meet me where I was), Zephy prioritizes connection with her needs to such an extend that she is disrespectful to the needs of others, Zephy is highschoolish, clique, immature etc.
* Vic fears vulnerability and has a wrong idea of what it means to be tantric (not lack of vulnerability, but comfort with it).
* Josh is unware of his own flaws and doesnt understand that more knowledge is supposed to make someone more humble and aware of what they dont know, rather than arrogant and superior. Me being inspired by him is not an invitation to be looked down upon. 



**Creating insecurity is manipulative. It can also backfire**

- I did this when I said to S that "I am on a journey and I cannot say about the future" made S close down.
- I did this with J when I said "I am popular and would be snogging others and be sensitive" can make J close down. 


---

The difference between 
* "invitation"/"Suggestion" and "getting"/"dictating suggestion and advice, 
* leading and following
* control and surrender

-----

What people say about me:

* "I am deeply trustworthy. You dont need to care about the wounded feminine"
* Kind eyes
* Gentle
* Care in my eyes
* Intelligent, Brainy
* Playful, Funny 
* Beta

What I am not sure of:

* Sexy
* Masculine


What I am not:
* Not Alpha
* Not "Big"


Wise Beyond My Years (Ingrid) vs Immature (Zephyr)


----

**People perceive qualities from your energy, not from your verbal or physical selves.**

It matters little what you actually say. J can say "Big Fucking Vibrator" with a funny energy, and it would be damn funny. 

No matter how you act big, people would still think the same of you. You have no control over how people see you, but only over your energy.

----



**Parts Work**

Example:
Jessie
Lucy: 


**Controller**

Controller evolved when we were young, to make us feel safe, both from physical harm and to be in connection



As we grow up, we do not need it for the role it originally played


A controller is needed, but we need to change its job descriptin, to grow it to a higher version.  "You will choose your people and choose your moments" where you can let it go

What does the controller do for you?

Autopilor Controller-produced defence mechanisms/ Strategies to feel safe:

* Being good
* People pleasing
* Never crying
* Workaholic
* Planner
* Getting Angry
* Self Harm
* Addictions
* 

Controller prevents you from feeling hurt, being angry, focussed on target, v  

----

**Attachment Theory**


Islands:
* Tend to like alone time ("I like to have my partner in the house but not in the room")
* A bit stressful to be close to other people
* Over reliance on self regulation
* Childhood: when you grew up, it would be about performance, to be "a certain way", to not disturb or embarrase care-giver
* Not good at expressing feelings
* Shame of not being good enough
* Low verbal/low expression
* Solitude -> social/relational transitions are hard
* Shame around being needy or being in debt e.g. receiving presents is hard
* Need time to process
* Dont like why questions
* sense of being unlovable
* dislike conflict, brush it under the carpet, just move on
* find it difficult to ask for help

e.g. Frieder, Luke, Sarah



How to make islands worse?
* Calling their name from another room
* Holding them
* Asking them about their feelings ("Feels like a threat")
* Giving them too much time alone

How to make islands better?
* making positive statements
* keepign words to a minimum
* giving them warnign when things are about to change
* know they have a need to distance and they will miss you

Waves:

* Also focus on their own needs, but their needs are different
* Emotional Regulation is sought outside
* Expect to be disappoonte
* Get distressed because they expect upset
* Create drama to test if alright
* Long periods of contact
* A bit negative
* Insecure relationaly, separation anxiety
* Emotions go up and down
* Silence is a problem
* Seek conflict, keep coming back to it

e.g. Richa, Ross

How to make waves worse?
* Walking away from them
* Arguing with logic
* 

Anchors:

* Tend to relate in a secure way
* Value relationship over everything else, even their own needs
* tend to be fully committed once they enter 
* Unpredictable
* one can make them worse by not putting relationships first
* Need to be valued, concern for fairness/justice
* 



Dont talk about frameworks in real life dates.

I am interested in a relationship.
These are the things I need? Would you be willing to meet those?
What are the things that you need?


-----

**Safety**



What is the difference between "being safe" and "feeling safe"?


Feeling safe: 
* to be met without judgement
* to be resilient
* 
What does safety look like?

* People being present
* Having a physical space where I am protected


What does feeling unsafe look like?

* Cannot trust yourself
* loss of control
* hearts racing
* eyes darting
* belly tense
* shaking in my legs


What do I need to feel safe?

* When you need space, I need to hear the reassurance that you'd be back
* I need to know that you'd say "No" when I am too close to you
* 


------



**Zones of Awareness**

* Outer World
* Inner World (emotionality)
* Mental Zone (thoughts, fantasies, dreaming, imagining)


----

Women worry about men's boundaries because they project their own conservative boundaries. So one needs to communicate that its okay to do X,Y,Z, that you want it, enjoy it.


**Keys to Intimacy**

* First Intimacy
* Step out of auto-pilor
* Step into the unknown
* Go Slow
* Lean in

* Notice if you are willing
* Notice things that get in the way (and when you do that, do not beat yourself up or fuel the inner critic; instead call the kind parent)
* Ask: In this meeting, what do i need to feel safe/relaxed? 
    - Ginta was afraid that I would be attracted to her
    - To be respected in my truth (Jason)
    - Full Attention to what I am saying

Example: Bjorn: Difficult to see people turn away. Start saying things to bring it back. Talking about things that need not be said. Need for reconnection.



----

Lessons from Marriage

* I need to see my wife at the end of the day
* I need communication on how your day is going
* I need sincere expressions of love (apart from any obligations)
* I want to feel needed. Or do I want to feel desired

You have agreements, not boundaries for others

Notice the difference between:
"You cant have oral sex or I'll leave" vs "I will be hurt if you have oral sex"

-------






---
**Buddhafield**


Intro

* Name a smell you like
* Name a sound you like


Jayaraja's framework


Old Framework:
Good vs Bad
Deserving vs Undeserving
Right vs Wrong

New Framework: 
* Needs are being met or not
* What is alive in your heart
* Dont hear criticism, instead hear the need

Men's Space

Erection is about the mind. How to better them?
* Sustained practice of self-pleasure
* Realizable fantasies with a real person
* Ashwagandha, Black cardamon oil, AHD, Kegel exercises, Trustus tibulus, Raw cacao
* No matter how much you talk with your partner, sometimes your bodies knows. Subconscious fears.


Co-coaching

Barriers to intimacy:
* Fear of friendzone
* Fear of being taken for granted
* Fear of caretaking/rescuing
* Fear of giving too much
* Fear of vulnerability

Flirting Workshop
* What do you appreciate in yourself?
* What do you appreciate in the other?
* Ask someone something


Contact Improv

* Feel Floor/Weight
* Feel body
* Roll on floor
* Notice other bodies
* Give weight with hands- taich 10%/20%/70%
* Falling front and back, feet on floor, bent knees, relax, go with gravity

Storytelling

* What message is alive in your heart that you'd like to share?
* How can you be of service in this moment?


------

i remember back when i was going on dates that i was often in convincing mode: convincing her that i'm interesting, that i'm attentive, that i'm accomplishednow i'm not going on dates but when i do i wanna be like fuck that either you see me or you don't, your loss if you don't

the way i got out of that was . . . like being fucking kind to myself
I'm thinking the problem is that it's all about how the girl experiences it. I would try to reorganize this about how primarily you experience the interactions.like saying *my experience matters*. it’s not good or cool or fair at all for me to feel this way. im not entitled to anything specific from any person or any society

my felt awareness/experience of the world expanded from 

> when around girl, she is all i can think about, i need to make her like me, there’s no one else
the phallusoraptors
@phallusoraptors
·

> wow. i have my own life to go back to. my actual friends, my actual lovers, partners, they will take care of me. they are the ones expected to take care of me
>
> not this person. they just exist. but if we vibe, we might connect

if you can remember your friends exist, and they still fundamentally are the ones to take care of you, any single interaction with a person becomes v low stakes
consider the girl’s opportunity cost of not interacting with a cool person such as yourself 

https://twitter.com/phallusoraptors/status/1519353358397571072
