---

layout: post-journal
title: How To Decide Path And Purpose In Life? 
date:   2019-12-29 00:45:11
tag: 
categories: journal
excerpt: 
permalink: /purpose

---

Don’t believe your thoughts. The voice in your head sounds like your voice but that doesn’t make it yours. Remember what your inner compass feels like. Use that feeling.  Sometimes it’s helpful to see beliefs, stereotypes, even language and habitual ways of thinking as forces that have colonized humanity. There’s space and life beyond these. Follow your curiosity about that dimension. It exists and is vast — infinitely more expansive than the mind’s ability to think.  Speaking to yourself in the third person makes you wiser 


- Have a hugely vicarious imagination - to figure out the difference between what you really love and what who’s idea you love.   There’s a different in having something and looking like we have the thing. Don’t mistake the map for the territory, else you’ll never be fulfilled. For example, actual programming vs acting like a programmer.  There’s a difference between what you like, and what you’d like to like, between love, and the idea of love, being aware, and being aware that you are aware

- Have life experiences and reflect on them, what you felt about them before and after so you can figure out the difference between the remembering experience and lived experience.  Find out who you really are. Identify the feeling. Take notes. Collates. 
 
- Learn from other people’s lives and preemptively avoid the mistakes they made  (e.g. leaving investment banking to startup, or not going into academia) 

- Do the things that can hold itself against the worst critcisims? Do you want to do it despite suffering? 

- Ask yourself is it why is it meaningful?  Is it intrinsically meaningful, or are you doing it because of social proof? What is your benchmark for social proof - is it your immediate circle, national, or International? ome of the things I have walked away from: BRCA elections, event management, jobs in finance sector: have been according to this principle. 

- What are the opportunity costs? What are you giving up? Life is tragic. 

- Anticipation of regret: In your old age, would you regret the time spent on that? 

- Think about the existential negatives and can I cope with them? Would i want time to pursue things like writing, gymming, girls? Or Am I fine spending my free time writing mundane reports and excel sheets?

- When faced with a difficult problem one trick is to ask how you would view your choice in hindsight a year later. I'm able to make clearer judgments about situations, when someone else is going through them. It's much harder when I'm the subject of the story.  Your mental context is so much more developed when you're thinking about yourself (not in the 3rd person). You have skin in the game, maybe it's that you're worried about the outcome of the situation, or it's just stressing you out, or you're thinking about how it will affect your friends/family/the rest of your life. So when you view it from an outsider's perspective, and throw away all that mental "noise", you have a clearer head and can make better decisions with the long-term in mind.  Alternatively, if you're going through something, you could try imagining someone else in the same situation (make up someone if you have to). What advice would you give to them? Then use that advice for yourself. 

we cannot always foresee our future path. I was incredibly sad about joining Opera, but without Opera I would have never had the great friends I made at B202. 



References:

- https://medium.com/the-mission/3-steps-to-discover-your-superpowers-64516d3673ca
- http://nextshark.com/man-reveals-how-choosing-comfort-in-his-20s-led-to-a-life-of-emptiness-and-pain/
- http://www.brainpickings.org/2012/02/27/purpose-work-love/
- http://markmanson.net/life-purpose
- https://www.brainpickings.org/2015/09/30/nietzsche-find-yourself-schopenhauer-as-educator/