---

layout: post-journal
title: On Winning Mentality
date:   2019-10-26 10:45:11
tag: 
categories: journal
excerpt: 
permalink: /winning

---




On winning mentality

 Did I assume others know better in some situation where I could have?  I lack a winning mentality. I expect myself to lose and get happiness from the surprise of winning.  I feel that thinking of myself as an underdog would help me win, since that would make me set higher targets and try harder.  The narrative in my head is always of deficiency, not of sufficiency.   

Why? 

- ‘’He painted a very feeble picture when he spoke of himself, a practice that was humorously meant, but that bellied, nevertheless, an excessively vulnerable self-conception. For he measured all his actions by a private standard of perfection, and laboured in service of this standard; as a consequence he was never really satisfied with any of his efforts, or with their results, and tended, in general, towards defeatism. These nuances of his character were lost upon the subjects of the British Crown, with whom he shared but eighty or hundred words, but to his compatriots, he was reenrolled for his cynical hour, his melancholy spirit, and his dogged perseverance in the service of untouchable ideals.”

This mentality spills over to an instinctive belief that others know better, and their judgement is to be trusted over my own.  This lets people run over me.  

I resent people because I allow them to take up high status positions, because I do not know how to take those positions myself.  Sometimes I ask questions just to communicate. This is low status behaviour.  
Example: When persuading people to work for me, e.g., when I was having conversation with designers from Hike and Roposo, I would often end up in a position where they would end advising me what I should be doing. Eventually, I would lose out on these candidates, people do not work for those who they perceive to be of a lower status than them. People want to follow winners. “Think you're a slave and you'll find a master; think you're a master and slaves will find you” "If you a low opinion of yourself you’ll attract people who agree with that low opinion."  
It’s easy to get impostor syndrome and self-doubt when you’re starting out. And when you’re feeling that unsure, you stop listening to your gut — the thing that got you to where you are. Because not everyone is cut out to be a founder. Not everyone is cut out to start a company. And if you’ve gotten this far trusting your instincts, you need to stick with it. This gets tricky though: I’m not the expert of everything at our company. We have engineers, and marketers, and designers, and they’re better at what they do than I am. So you get into the mindset of, “Oh, let’s just do whatever they think.” And in a way, giving your team that kind of ownership is important to get them to grow and learn. But at the same time, there’s a reason why I’m here too.  
Same with our investors — I felt like because they’d given me money, I should do what they say. But they didn’t invest in themselves — they invested in us. If they wanted someone to do exactly what they wanted, they could just start their own company and hire someone to run it. Your gut, as a founder, builds in a lot of data points and experience and information that no one else has. Your gut contains thousands of thousands of little data points that you might not always be great at vocalizing — but they’re there. And if you listen to your gut, and trust it, and use it to lead your team, you’ll be much better off in the long run. You won’t be sitting around, eight years later, with a list of things you’d wish you’d done right the first time. No one is smarter than you at your company.   
When you expect yourself to lose, you accept defeat without any consequence. You accept it because it conforms with your identity. You allow others to believe that you are not worthy of following. You remove their anxieties and self-doubt for them. This is particularly lethal in interviews. An interviewer's job is to pick winners - not dispense social justice.   And the interviewer can easily gauge who you are from what you think of yourself.  Similarly, interviewees’ concern is to join winners, not a sinking ship. If you think of yourself as a sinking ship, then they would think the same of you.  

Just remember, you can’t climb the ladder of success with your hands in your pockets.” Pursue your mission systematically and diligently, with conviction, confidence and calm. Life is short. You owe to yourself the pro-activeness present in Army (or Consulting). Have the attitude of an ex-army commando.  Go to the gym.  Push heavy things around.  Break a sweat.  ~ That's important.  Don't just half-ass it.  Push yourself until you want to die.  This is how you can get the highest ROI.  Anything less is a waste of your time.

“In the immediate point where you’re about to perform, it’s not helpful to focus on winning but about the performance you want to elicit”

Winning frees you. That winning the first time takes you to another level - gets rid of a major psychological barrier: Quizzes, IIT, and other places.


To be a winner, I must have a supreme, unwavering confidence in my abilities.  I must keep a laser-like focus when surrounded by distractions, and have the strength of will to conquer all anxiety, frustration, and discouragement. This requires courage (and short term memory loss!) Giving everything you’ve got (effort/perseverance/take initiative/being a leader) in order to win, also in the face of adversity (e.g. red card, missed chance, goal down)  is the winning mentality. I must have a relentless focus, a refusal to think of things outside their control and focus on excellence. I must be able bring my intensity to the next level when needed, and sustain a high level of motivation throughout my life.  As a winner, I must bring my A-game in every task, otherwise its not worth doing. "Go big or go home” is the mantra.     Confidence and self-belief is everything: don't diminish yourself.  Be always “on”. 


On the idea of keeping a laser-like focus, Andy Murray found it only after winning the Olympic gold medal: 

"I was so excited to play in the Olympics and be part of it that I was doing a lot of media. I learnt a lot from that match. It was one of the toughest losses of my career, and I don't plan to repeat the experience on Wednesday. I was going to the opening ceremony, I was trying to speak to all of the athletes and take pictures with them, I was collecting the pins from each team - I was loving being part of it. "But when I lost, I thought, 'Why was I doing all that stuff? I'm here to win matches, I'm not here to collect pins.' I loved going to the opening ceremony but had to think, 'Is that the best thing for my preparation?’ 

Contrast this with the case of Eugenie Bouchard: who started believing that she is destined for winning even before reaching it, and was thrown totally off the track. 

https://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/olympics/tennis/9454659/Andy-Murray-I-would-not-trade-my-London-2012-Olympic-gold-for-a-first-Wimbledon-title.html

Andy Murray found that elusive winning mentality in the middle of the career, unlike Jana Novotna or Goran Ivanisevic - who, despite having the opportunities to win,  struggled for years because they lacked the magical sense of “knowing winning”, and the focus and inner belief that comes with it. Andy Murray, prior to winning the Olympic Gold, was stuck in the same mire of uncertainty and doubt that did not leave Ivanisevic and Novotna through much of their career. But winning the Olympic gold set him free of it - it unlocked the winning mentality, and their was no going back. Winning gives you a mental grasp of your target, and once you know it,  darkness and uncertainty disappears. 

When I think of winners, I think of Roger Federer, Cristiano Ronaldo, Gareth Bale, Maria Sharapova and Steve Jobs. These personalities exude an intimidating confidence.   Their aura plants seeds of doubts in everyone else’s minds. (For example: Nadal was  able to turn the tables on Federer because he had prior experience of winning matches against him from match-point down. It gave him a belief - a belief others struggle to find - that no matter how much down he was when facing Federer, he could always find a way back).  For contrast, consider the the chest-thumping and crowd-pleasing Novak Djokovic. Djokovic cares too much of what other people think. But a winner only cares about what he thinks of himself.  

A winning mindset is tied to an identity and worldview - not to an outcome.  Losing isn’t just an event which is disappointing - it conflicts with who you are.  When you lose, you are not being yourself. Your entire worldview is at threat.  The winner’s instinct is a product of truly believing that you are better than your opponent.  In believing this, you are not giving your opponent disrespect, but giving yourself more respect than you do to your opponent. When they lose, they are disappointed not because of the event of losing per se, but disappointment with oneself that comes with the knowledge that you’re better than others yet did not perform at that level. Sometimes, when they know they have given they are best, they are not disappointment at all. They do not care for what other people think, but care much more about what they think of themselves.  “Show me a good loser, and I’ll show you a loser”.  

Winning mentality is also exhibited by teams: Real Madrid or Manchester United, or institutions: Oxford. Harvard. McKinsey.  Wimbledon. The New Yorker. The Nobel Prize. Google.  Winners attract other winners.  

American’s ruthless will to win. Americans are single-minded like no nationality I have ever seen. They get down straight to business. They love to win. They play to win. And they will push relentlessly 24/7 and never let up. All. the. time. In every field - business, technology, sports, you name it. And that’s an attitude after my own heart. I simply love it and wouldn't have it any other way. The wealth, friendliness, optimism, arrogance, insularity and even ignorance of Americans is all too famous and talked about. What is monumentally understated is the determination of top American professionals to pull out all stops to win. In every damn field. Don’t be fooled by the friendly exterior. Yes, they are indeed a generous people and they smile a lot - but once they are in a serious contest, Son, you better have your shit straightened out, bring your A-game or they’ll clean out your clock. That affable personality conceals a steely and ruthless determination to do whatever it will take to climb to the top. You know the way some Westerners look and wonder why Americans work so hard? Yes, it’s the price you pay if you want to win. And Americans at the top in each profession will pay it gladly! I’ve seen that play go down in my career everywhere from research laboratories at American universities to Wall Street investment banks. The lawyer who served as general counsel at my sister’s former employer, a large corporation in NYC - you know when that SOB came into work? 4 a.m. every morning. You'd look at his annual paycheck of over a million dollars and think he had it so good - unless you knew how incredibly dedicated and diligent the man was. And nobody sees him start his work day when it's still dark before dawn. You’re in a race to run those experiments and publish that paper?  You’re vying to get that big M&A deal? That’s the kind of men who you’re up against. If the opponents aren’t down with it 100%, the American scientists, lawyers or investment bankers will chew them up and spit them out. Case in point - Sports. The top echelons of sport are the ultimate exemplar of determination and the ability to take stress. Now, I’m not even talking about the Olympics. Just take a look at soccer to see what I mean. Most Americans don’t give a hoot about watching that sport compared to the big four (baseball, American football, basketball, ice hockey). And people constantly mock Americans for calling it “soccer”. Yet the American soccer team has reached the round of 16 four times in the last six FIFA World Cups. Think about it - this nation whose people don’t even care much for the sport, manages to have a record as good as England on the international stage, a nation that is batshit bonkers about football! And there are populous nations like Mexico who are bananas about football (but don’t manage anywhere close. Even outside of the World Cup, since 2000, the US has won 13 and lost just 7 of its matches against our neighbors to the South. You can bet that each time Mexico wins, its a much bigger deal in Mexico City than it is in New York City when the U.S. team wins (in fact few even notice). Can you now even imagine what would happen if Americans got even half as crazy about football as they are about basketball or American football? The NBA slogan sums up the quintessential American attitude when it comes to competition, better than anything else.


- https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=32&v=sutS7C7WQSc  
- https://www.1843magazine.com/content/ideas/ian-leslie/non-cogito-ergo-sum
- https://www.quora.com/What-match-had-Federer-won-it-would-have-strengthened-his-legacy-the-most
https://www.theplayerstribune.com/en-us/articles/romelu-lukaku-ive-got-some-things-to-say
- 
