---
layout: post-journal
title: The Career Holy Grail
date:   2020-09-26 09:00:11
tag: 
categories: journal
excerpt: 
permalink: /grail

---

The lives and careers of most people will be decidedly mundane.  They will not be rich, famous, attractive or powerful; they will not reach the pinnacle of sports, entertainment, academia, politics, or business. No Olympic Medal, no Oscar, no Nobel Prize, no Prime Ministership, no billion-dollar wealth.

I turned 30 this year. By now I have come to terms with the fact that my life will be like the lives of most people. I am O.K. with that. But before I shuffle off the mortal coil, I would like to take a shot at two ventures: (1) building a company, and (2) writing a novel. 


I think of the careers chosen by most of my fellow recipeients of an elite education: law, medicine, consulting, academia, finance, and engineering. Climbing the meritocratic ladder in these fields requires incredible smarts, work-ethic and competitiveness. They demand complete and utmost devotion in most of your 20s and early 30s.   The rewards is a meaninful contribution to the economy, intelligent coworkers, and prestigious careers in institutions that take care of life's basic needs.  An honorable career in the upper echelons of the middle class.


**The 10 Year Ladder**

Year | Law[^Law]       | Medicine[^Medicine]    | Academia  | Consulting | 
---| ----------- | ---------------------  | --------- | ---------   |
1 | LPC/ BPTC  |   Foundation doctor | JRF/Post Doc | Analyst |    
2 | Trainee/Pupil  |   Foundation doctor |JRF/Post Doc | Analyst |  
3 | Trainee/Barrister  | Junior Fellow   | JRF/Post Doc | Jr. Associate |    
4 | Assoc. solicitor  |  GP Specialty registrar | Lecturer | Associate | 
5 | Assoc. solicitor  |   GP Specialty registrar | Lecturer |  EM | 
6 | Sr. Assoc. solicitor  |   GP  | Lecturer | EM | 
7 | Sr. Assoc. solicitor  |   GP  | Assoc. Professor |  Principal | 
8 | Sr. Assoc. solicitor  |   GP  | Assoc. Professor |  Principal |   
9 | Partner  |   GP | Assoc. Professor | Assoc. Partner |
10 | Senior partner |   GP | Professor | Partner |


---

What about the non-elite careers? These include positions as administraters, accountants, HR, tax advisors, real estate agents, government officials, customer service representives; all honorable jobs with important roles in our society, but with different trade-offs: lesser work, lesser competitiveness, lesser income and prestige and IQ of coworkers, yet in some sense, more freedom. More time for leasure, more time for family. Work is work; not something to tie your identity around. 

There are nurses, teachers, civil servants and leaders of small or medium-sized businesses. Again, less renumeration, but more highly respected work, more meaningful contributions to the community. 


Then there are farmers, plumbers, woodworkers, electricians etc. Lowest rung of the prestige and income scale, but most tangible work. 



[^Medicine]: Newly qualified doctors enter a two-year Foundation Programme, where they undertake terms in a variety of different specialities. These must include training in General Medicine and General Surgery but can also include other fields such as Paediatrics, Anaesthetics or General Practice. Following completion of the Foundation Programme a doctor can choose to specialise in one field. All routes involve further assessment and examinations. To train as a general practitioner (GP), after completing the Foundation Programme, a doctor must complete eighteen months of posts in a variety of hospital specialities - often including paediatrics, psychiatry, geriatrics and obstetrics & gynaecology. The trainee also has to spend eighteen months as a General Practice Speciality Registrar - a trainee based in a GP practice. After completing this training and the relevant exams, the doctor can become a GP and can practise independently.

[^Law]: Generally, it will take eight or more years to make partner at a large commercial firm. the senior partner is elected by the firm’s partners to serve a three-year term and is typically re-elected until they step down from the role or someone else voices an interest in the position. the Magic Circle - comprised of London's five most prestigious law firms - currently offer first year trainees salaries in the region of £45,000 to £48,000. Once trainees reach their second year salaries rise to between £51,000 and £54,000.

------


Where does the income of an average worker under capitalism go?


Here's a breakdown.

Expense   | Proportion |    
----------| -----------| 
Taxes   | 30%        | 
Accomodation   | 20% | 
Utilities  | 10% | 
Food  | 10%  |
Commute  | 10% |
Luxury   | 10%  |
Pension  |  5%   |
Savings  |  5%   |


-----

**What would my ideal job achieve?**


Success would not be a billion dollar exit, where I am briefly powerful,  receive a modicum of fame, and become insanely rich. Success would not be a destination, on reaching which I would become a "has-been". 

Instead, it would be a life of continued meaning and play in the present. A job which ensures a basic level of financial security, autonomy, creative self expression and inner fulfillment. A venture which allows me to work with people whose company I enjoy and whose respect and admiration I am at the receiving end of.

A company which forms a community like [The Chelsea Hotel](https://medium.com/@bagelboy/make-america-bohemian-again-de846e35d757), or the English gentleman's clubs like [The Hawks Club](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hawks%27_Club), or secret societies like [The Apostles](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cambridge_Apostles)  or [The Bloomsbury Group](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bloomsbury_Group). Or Cumberland Lodge, for an example I have experienced.  Something that I am uniquely position to bring into existence: an institution that does for the creative potential of academics, philosophers, mathematicians, artists and computer scientists what Y Combinator did for entrepreneurs.

A job where I flourish in events like the [Penny Universities](https://thonyc.wordpress.com/2015/09/29/the-penny-universities/), or the culture of [coffeehouses in Oxford](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/English_coffeehouses_in_the_17th_and_18th_centuries) or [French Salons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salon_(gathering)) or Math Circles. To live life like [Andre Weil](https://www.ams.org/journals/notices/201801/rnoti-p54.pdf) or [Gore Vidal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gore_Vidal) or Stephen Fry or [AJ Ayer](https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/1999/jun/20/featuresreview.review4)

To bring to life creative projects, as part of an improv troupe, a sketch comedy duo or a comedy collective Examples:  Upright Citizens Brigade, The Cambridge Footlights, [The Oxford Imps](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Oxford_Imps), Fry and Laurie, Mitchell and Webb, [All India Bakchod](All_India_Bakchod), College Humour. 

A job which allows me to do something for marginalised people: the poor, old and the infirm. 

A job which allows me to do something in mathematics, computer science and philosophy education.


-----









