---

layout: post-journal
title: On Winning 
date:   2020-03-29 00:45:11
tag: 
categories: journal
excerpt: 
permalink: /winning

---


It’s the semi-finals. We have reached the last four of the NDTV Tech Grandmasters, a nationally televised quiz show which saw participation from schools, colleges and corporates all over India.  We are riding on a string of impressive victories of various kinds: narrow strategic wins, impressive comebacks or no-contest domination. Now is our time to soar and go one step further. The contest is about to begin, but there’s an introductory segment, in which the host asks us: 
> “IIT Delhi. Impressive story of success all through. Great journey till here, but the first question I have, You took out [some team] in the last one. This time a fight more of the equals, or you think you are superior? Are you flying high is the main question?”

Sheepishly, without any smile, I say:
> “No we’re not, actually….because we are well aware of this team…. because we’ve been quizzing in the past.” 

I then proceed to admit that we have been defeated by the other team multiple times. 

If you’d asked me then, I would have elaborated on the virtues of thinking of yourself as an underdog. I would have said that if you overestimate the other team, it makes you set higher standards and try harder. If you’re not-flying high you’d stay grounded and pay attention.  I might have even related the pleasures of lulling the opposition in a false sense of security before taking them down.  After all, it was the mindset that had landed us in the top four all over India. 	It worked. 

Until it didn’t. 

In that episode, we won the first two rounds and raced to a 80-30 lead, only to choke in the final buzzer round and lose 80-70. And on reflection,  the reason we collapsed was not that the other team was better, or we had worse luck, or that we were nervous. We were not.  But what we lacked was a winning mentality. And I suspect that was the difference.


---




The pessimistic outlook as not just smart as a motivator for trying harder, but was also a clever emotional management strategy. Losing no longer hurts - when you lose, things are as you had expected.  When you win, you get the pleasant surprise of victory. (I remember that when I won my first quiz - the Chandigarh regionals of ESPN School Quiz, I was not brimming with happiness and confidence that I had scored a deserving victory. Instead, I was positively baffled that others teams were so much worse.)

Dropping the expectation of winning was my insurance against the risk of heartbreak. What I didn’t realise then, and I do now, is that buying that insurance  might have, at times, ensured the very outcome I had insured against.


----


**What’s wrong with the underdog mentality?**


- When expect yourself to lose, you accept defeat without any consequence. You accept it because it conforms with your identity. And you lose an important motivator to avoid losing: a sense of disappointment with yourself, a kind of shame that hurts. 

- Worse, by allowing the opponent to see that you are vulnerable, you remove their anxieties and self-doubt for them. 

- A lack of winning mentality is particularly lethal in interviews. As it is the case in sports, an interviewer's job is to spot and pick winners- not dispense social justice.  And the interviewer can easily gauge who you are from what you think of yourself. Similarly, interviewees’ concern is to join winners, not a sinking ship. If you think of yourself as a sinking ship, then they would think the same of you.  
> "If you a low opinion of yourself you’ll attract people who agree with that low opinion."   

- Often, thinking yourself as an underdog spills over to an instinctive belief that others know better, and their judgement is to be trusted over my own.  And then you allow others to believe that you are not worthy of following.  ( [^interviewFail] 

> “Think you're a slave and you'll find a master; think you're a master and slaves will find you”

[^interviewFail]: Sometimes I even feign ignorance and ask questions.  This has, as expected, led to instances where people assume high status. When persuading people to work for me, when I was having conversation with designers from Hike and Roposo, I would let them advise  me on what I should be doing. Eventually, I would lose out on them people do not work for those who they perceive to be of a lower status than them. People want to follow winners.




---

**What do winners look like?**

When I think of winners, I think of Cristiano Ronaldo, Gareth Bale, Roger Federer, and the likes. They all exude an intimidating confidence.  Their aura plants seeds of doubts in the minds of their opponents.  They seem to find a way to perform (score crucial goals or break points, or come up with ideas) just when these things are needed.  It is the same with teams: think of the ability of Zidane’s Real Madrid to score goals in extra time or Ferguson’s Manchester United to snatch victory from the jaws of defeat. 

But even institutions outside sports and competitive contest can reflect winning mentality: Oxford, Harvard, McKinsey, The New Yorker, The Economist. These institutions have all formed an image of perfectionism and excellence. One gets the impression that any task taken by members of these institutions in their respective fields would be done well.

---

**What does the winning mindset feel like?**

  A winning mindset is tied to an identity and worldview. Losing isn’t just an event which is disappointing - it conflicts with who you are.  When you lose, you are not being yourself. Your entire worldview is at threat.  They do not care for what other people think, but care much more about what they think of themselves. “Show me a good loser, and I’ll show you a loser”. 

- A supreme, unwavering confidence in their abilities. There are no seeds of self-doubt ready to sprout. 
- A laser-like focus when surrounded by distractions and a refusal to think of things outside their control. The focus conquers all anxiety, frustration, and discouragement. 
- Ability to bring intensity to the next level at the right moments. Especially in the face of adversity (e.g. red card, missed chance, goal down), winners give everything they’ve got in order to win.  Since winners bring their A-game in every task, it is crucial to pick battles.  
> "Go big or go home”

---

**How to find it?**


- **Remember the victories and forget past defeats**. If you’ve never won, winning frees you. That winning the first time takes you to another level - gets rid of a major psychological barrier to winning: the seeds of doubt

- In practice, pursue your mission systematically and diligently, with conviction, confidence and calm. You owe to yourself the pro-activenesspresent in Army (or Consulting), to have the attitude of an ex-army commando.  
> Go to the gym.  Push heavy things around.  Break a sweat. Don't just half-ass it.  Push yourself until you want to die.  This is how you can get the highest ROI.  Anything less is a waste of your time.

- In the immediate point where you’re about to perform, it’s not helpful to focus on winning but about the performance you want to elicit.  Focus is maintaining a clear mind, recognizing your purpose, and implementing your system (discussed next) : https://www.essentialtennis.com/winners-mentality-tennis-development/

- Observe: Assess strengths and weaknesses of opponents and exploit it. 

- Recognize when your opponent is struggling whereby you can attack and build momentum. When your opponent is beating themselves up for their play, this is your golden ticket to finishing off the match. 




---


**Example: Americans**


> Americans are single-minded like no nationality I have ever seen. They get down straight to business. They love to win. They play to win. And they will push relentlessly 24/7 and never let up. All. the. time. In every field - business, technology, sports, you name it. And that’s an attitude after my own heart. I simply love it and wouldn't have it any other way. The wealth, friendliness, optimism, arrogance, insularity and even ignorance of Americans is all too famous and talked about. What is monumentally understated is the determination of top American professionals to pull out all stops to win. In every damn field. Don’t be fooled by the friendly exterior. Yes, they are indeed a generous people and they smile a lot - but once they are in a serious contest, Son, you better have your shit straightened out, bring your A-game or they’ll clean out your clock. That affable personality conceals a steely and ruthless determination to do whatever it will take to climb to the top. You know the way some Westerners look and wonder why Americans work so hard? Yes, it’s the price you pay if you want to win. And Americans at the top in each profession will pay it gladly! I’ve seen that play go down in my career everywhere from research laboratories at American universities to Wall Street investment banks. The lawyer who served as general counsel at my sister’s former employer, a large corporation in NYC - you know when that SOB came into work? 4 a.m. every morning. You'd look at his annual paycheck of over a million dollars and think he had it so good - unless you knew how incredibly dedicated and diligent the man was. And nobody sees him start his work day when it's still dark before dawn. You’re in a race to run those experiments and publish that paper?  You’re vying to get that big M&A deal? That’s the kind of men who you’re up against. If the opponents aren’t down with it 100%, the American scientists, lawyers or investment bankers will chew them up and spit them out. Case in point - Sports. The top echelons of sport are the ultimate exemplar of determination and the ability to take stress. Now, I’m not even talking about the Olympics. Just take a look at soccer to see what I mean. Most Americans don’t give a hoot about watching that sport compared to the big four (baseball, American football, basketball, ice hockey). And people constantly mock Americans for calling it “soccer”. Yet the American soccer team has reached the round of 16 four times in the last six FIFA World Cups. Think about it - this nation whose people don’t even care much for the sport, manages to have a record as good as England on the international stage, a nation that is batshit bonkers about football! And there are populous nations like Mexico who are bananas about football (but don’t manage anywhere close. Even outside of the World Cup, since 2000, the US has won 13 and lost just 7 of its matches against our neighbors to the South. You can bet that each time Mexico wins, its a much bigger deal in Mexico City than it is in New York City when the U.S. team wins (in fact few even notice). Can you now even imagine what would happen if Americans got even half as crazy about football as they are about basketball or American football? The NBA slogan sums up the quintessential American attitude when it comes to competition, better than anything else.

---

Example: [Romelo Lukaku](https://www.theplayerstribune.com/en-us/articles/romelu-lukaku-ive-got-some-things-to-say)

> I didn’t say a word. I didn’t want her to stress. I just ate my lunch. But I swear to God, I made a promise to myself that day. It was like somebody snapped their fingers and woke me up. I knew exactly what I had to do, and what I was going to do.

> People in football love to talk about mental strength. Well, I’m the strongest dude you’re ever going to meet. Because I remember sitting in the dark with my brother and my mom, saying our prayers, and thinking, believing, knowing … it’s going to happen.

> Let me tell you something — every game I ever played was a Final. When I played in the park, it was a Final. When I played during break in kindergarten, it was a Final. I’m dead-ass serious. I used to try to tear the cover off the ball every time I shot it. Full power. We weren’t hitting R1, bro. No finesse shot. I didn’t have the new FIFA. I didn’t have a Playstation. I wasn’t playing around. I was trying to kill you. 

> I was all alone, and I had to stand up for myself. I went and got my I.D. from my bag and showed it to all the parents, and they were passing it around inspecting it, and I remember the blood just rushing through me … and I thought, “Oh, I’m gonna kill your son even more now. I was already going to kill him, but now I’m gonna destroy him. You’re gonna drive the boy home crying now.”

> I wanted to be the best footballer in Belgian history. That was my goal. Not good. Not great. The best. I played with so much anger, because of a lot of things … because of the rats running around in our apartment … because I couldn’t watch the Champions League … because of how the other parents used to look at me.

> I was on a mission.

> When I was 12, I scored 76 goals in 34 games.

> I told my mum that I would make it at 16.

> I was late by 11 days.

---

Example: [How Nadal Overcame Federer   in 2000s](https://www.quora.com/What-match-had-Federer-won-it-would-have-strengthened-his-legacy-the-most)


> The first is his willingness and ability to suffer on a tennis court longer than any other player.  The second Nadals ability to maintain a belief system that he was the underdog, even after beating Federer on grass and hard courts and taking a commanding lead in their head-to-head matches. These two ideas work together, as Nadal was determined to kill himself on every point because his game is based on his willingness to suffer until his opponent crumbles, and he knew he could never relax or let up since he believed he was the underdog. With this mindset, combined with his incredible court coverage, Nadal had the amazing ability to raise the level of his game on the most crucial points and hit an astonishing passing shot off a Federer winner.

> While Federer has shown the courage and short-term memory loss required to be a champion, it planted the seeds of doubt in Federer’s mind. More importantly, it gave confidence to Nadal that he could always come back, no matter how far behind he was against Federer.

----

Example: How Federer Returned To Winning Ways in late 2010s

> To defeat Nadal, Federer was finally forced to learn the difference between playing not to lose (which worked against 99.9% of the players he has faced in his career) and playing to win, which requires a disciplined plan of consistently taking risks at the right time. Ironically, it was only Federer’s acceptance that Nadal was the stronger player that allowed him to leave his comfort zone and take the risks needed to win these matches. 


----


Example: [How Djokovic Usurped Federer in 2011](https://www.1843magazine.com/content/ideas/ian-leslie/non-cogito-ergo-sum)

> The only reliable cure for overthinking seems to be enjoyment, something that both success and analysis can dull. Djokovic’s return was both the culmination of his life’s effort and an expression of careless joy.

> Federer choked. Thisis caused by thinking too much. When a footballer misses a penalty or a golfer fluffs a putt, it is because they have become self-conscious. By thinking too hard, they lose the fluid physical grace required to succeed. Perhaps Federer was so upset because, deep down, he recognised that his opponent had tapped into a resource that he, an all-time great, is finding harder to reach: unthinking. Unthinking is the ability to apply years of learning at the crucial moment by removing your thinking self from the equation. Thinking too much can kill not just physical performance but mental inspiration.




----

**Example: Andy Murray's Ascent**



Andy Murray found focus only after a 2008 Olympic defeat: 

> “I was so excited to play in the Olympics and be part of it that I was doing a lot of media. I learnt a lot from that match. It was one of the toughest losses of my career, and I don't plan to repeat the experience on Wednesday. I was going to the opening ceremony, I was trying to speak to all of the athletes and take pictures with them, I was collecting the pins from each team - I was loving being part of it. "But when I lost, I thought, 'Why was I doing all that stuff? I'm here to win matches, I'm not here to collect pins.' I loved going to the opening ceremony but had to think, 'Is that the best thing for my preparation?’ 

He got very close to winning [2012 Wimbledon Final](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WzCB4YQXPeM
), but you can see by how much it hurt him that he really wanted it.


But he then won the [Olympic 2012 Gold](https://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/olympics/tennis/9454659/Andy-Murray-I-would-not-trade-my-London-2012-Olympic-gold-for-a-first-Wimbledon-title.html), and that broke the barrier. He found the elusive winning mentality in the middle of the career, unlike Jana Novotna or Goran Ivanisevic - who, despite having the opportunities to win,  struggled for years because they lacked the magical sense of “knowing winning”, and the focus and inner belief that comes with it.
Prior to winning the Olympic Gold, Murray was stuck in the same mire of uncertainty and doubt that did not leave Ivanisevic and Novotna through much of their career. But winning the Olympic gold set him free of it - it unlocked the winning mentality, and their was no going back. Winning gives you a mental grasp of your target, and once you know it,  darkness and uncertainty disappears. 

Contrast Murray with [Eugenie Bouchard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eugenie_Bouchard), who after losing the 2014 Wimbledon Final, started believing that she is destined for winning even before actually winning, and was thrown totally off the track. 



