---

layout: post-normal
title: The Life Of A Party
date:   2023-03-27 12:00:11
tag: 
categories: 
    - journal
excerpt: 
permalink: /connect

---

The dress code was the easy bit. A dinner jacket needs to have silk lapels. Black Oxford shoes. The trousers had to be with silk seams.

The dress code had clear, simple, well-defined rules.

It was the conversation that could be messy, but I was prepared. There were questions that one is pretty much guaranteed to be asked: Where are you from? What do you do for work?  How do you know the host? 

A rookie would answer in a straightforward manner. But an unexpected but relevant response to a frequently asked question was the mark of a seasoned socialite. 

One way is to reformulate that question in your mind and make it more specific. "Where are you from?" to “What brought you to where you are currently living?”

“Yes, And” was also a good template for moving the conversation forward.

A rookie would reply “How are you?” "I'm good".

But adding why you’re good (“I’m good. I just started a book and I’m really enjoying it. Have you heard of it?”), or referring to a shared observation (“I’m good. They restocked the cold brew in the kitchen and it’s so strong. Have you tried it?”) adds coal to the steam engine of the conversation.

Your introduction had a greater scope for shaping. It was good to have an elevator pitch that paints a picture of you that will stay in the person’s head. You need one compelling character (you), a captivating theme, and some kind of narrative arc. At a professional event, you want to give the other person a good idea of your skills, qualifications, and where you’re looking to go in your career. 




To start a conversation, activate the small talk mode. The goal of small talk is to signal your interest in the other person and allowing them to signal interest or disinterest by how they respond. One does it by conventional openers: a frequently asked question would do (How’s it going? So...what do you do for work?). Or by anchoring on something common. One can find a common anchor by observing the surroundings. The weather is always there “Nice weather we’re having”. Food, often present in a party, is also a unifying point.One could have a rolodex of topics: name, work, work, these days, the room. “What does your name mean? What would you like it to mean?” “What’s your story?”   “How’d you end up in your line of work?” “What did you do today?” “What’s an interesting thing that happened at work today?”“What was the best part of your weekend?” “What are you looking forward to this week?” “Who do you think is the luckiest person in this room?” “What does this house remind you of?” Once the conversations starts flowing, the goal is to find better and more specific points of connection. A common friend - the host, for example. If its someone you already have a past be, a memory you experienced together could be a great point of connection.For example, “Hey, remember that time when we did X? That was so fun!” The story of how you met can be particularly powerfully connecting, because it is, essentially, your origin story.  Once you find the common anchor, reveal something about yourself in relation to the anchor,and encourage with a question. 

It is in general better to ask questions that are open ended as opposed to closed. 
Paraphrasing is the swiss army knife of communication: allows you to reframe, or pause, or think about the answer. It also requires you to listen in the same way cooking requires you to taste and drawing requires you to see. 



Discuss things you care about. A topic related to your professional field, for example, an article you saw or book you read. Or share something weird or interesting happen to you recently.

At the end of each topic or blurb, throw out a conversational spark.“ I can’t believe they did that, what would you guys do in that situation?” “…what do you guys think? Would you rather A or B?” “…If you got paid $1,000 would you do XYZ?”

Ask questions about their work that you genuinely want answered. Ask them about the people they work with. Figure out who you know in common. Say things like, “I hear that your school has started a new such-and-such program; is that something you were involved in?”, or “So-and-so from your group joined our faculty recently; nice person, interesting work”. If other people, projects, or laboratories come up in the conversation, say whatever positive things you honestly have to say about them. 

Introduce other people Soon as you meet one person, introduce that person to the next person—and add in a playful, “Hey, have you met so-and-so? We go way back.” When you introduce someone, don’t just introduce them by name. Tell a story about them and praise them. People will love you for this and it creates a natural flow into a longer conversation. Buddy up One great way to make conversations easier is to pair up with a good friend when you chat with others. This way you have someone there that you can always lean on in case the new conversation doesn’t flow that well.


- Eliminate the dull droning on about facts and figures — whether it’s snowing or raining, how cold it is, what we do for work, how long it takes to get to work, where we went to school — all those things that we think we have to talk about with someone new but that tell us little about who the person really is. Don’t confuse personal (“I like to travel”) with private (“I’m in the middle of an inheritance dispute”). Don’t gossip, bitch or complain. Avoid criticism, negativity, and arguments. Don’t try to argue with people ‘just for the sake of it’ or to ‘test if they come up with good counter-points’. It’s disrespectful. If you really want to talk about an issue in a debate format, express your desire and see whether the other person agrees or not. Do not pick up debates or arguments for the sake of intellectual discussion. Don’t let someone pin you down into a corner where you have to defend yourself. Continue keeping things light and a bit ridiculous and the air will change. You might even gain some respect. Keep a positive attitude (don’t forget the smile) even when you’re feeling attacked. If you choose to stay, then you have to stay deft and keep the air light.
- Ask for their advice. People want to help others and feel like they’re making a difference. Asking for their input will make them feel more valuable in the conversation while simultaneously stroking their ego.
    - “You know Greg, I’m supposed to plan a first date with this girl I really like but I’m afraid of screwing it up. Where do you like to take your dates?”
    - “Susan! That reminds me, do you have any nephews around the age of 7? It’s my nephews birthday next week and I haven’t a clue what to get him.”
    - Honing your Ask Reality check: people are going to remember at most three things about you. Make sure one of them is your ask- the most impactful thing they can do to help you. To maximize your ask, make it short, clear, and a single step. Otherwise, it will be harder to remember and execute. Making asks is often uncomfortable for smart successful people - you want to get by on your own and be so awesome that people will figure out how to help you on your own. This is not going to happen. On the other hand, if you have a clear actionable ask, people are eager to jump on it. Years ago, whenever I would travel somewhere, I would passively post “I’m going to be in town, who wants to hang out?” Maybe one or two people would respond if I was lucky. Now I actively ask friends who have lived there “who are the best people you know there? Can you put me in touch with them?” The result? Friendships and adventures. Some good examples of asks:
    - “I’m looking to get in touch with people who are director level or above in the elder care industry”
    - “I need a new apartment in San Francisco under $2200, preferably in the mission.
    - “I’m looking for customer-facing jobs in robotics that take advantage of my unique combination of technical skills and people skills”

It’s easier to say goodbye when you have the floor than to wait for the other person to take a breath and then abruptly say, “I’m going to go now, goodbye. If you make reference to something that was discussed earlier in the conversation, you show your counterpart that you’ve been listening and leave them with a good feeling. “It was nice talking to you. I thought what you said about the documentary series was really interesting. I will definitely look into it. I have to go now, I hope you have a great evening.” 

If you do not have the floor,  non-verbally communicate your intentions. You can do that by putting down your glass and moving away slightly – or the opposite: you can move closer to your counterpart and lift your hand towards them as if to touch them, or actually touch them. It depends on your relationship with the person you’re talking to. 

- If you have to exit abruptly, keep a number of exit strategies in your bag of tricks and pull one of them. You have to get going. Someone is expecting you. You need to take a call. 
  
If you want to join a group, be prepared as to what to say when you have a chance to speak “I just heard you talking about good restaurants and thought: I definitely need to go introduce myself!” 

If you want to address someone directly, it is a good idea to look at the person for a while -  it redirects the focus of the group to that person and makes them feel like they are the centre of attention. 


- Names. Care about names. Repeat someone’s name right after they introduce themselves to me. Think of a celebrity that has the same name so that it helps my memory by association.  “Remind me of your name again”. Introduce them to someone else. Call over your friend Steve, turn back to the person you were speaking to and say, “This is my friend Steve.” Pause. The other person will reveal his/her name to Steve and you will hear it. 


