---

layout: post-normal
title: Dance
date:   2023-03-25 12:00:11
tag: 
categories: 
    - journal
excerpt: 
permalink: /dance

---


I would love to just walk up a stage with a date and dance like [Uma Thurman and John Travolta in Pulp Fiction](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WSLMN6g_Od4&list=PLdIS7dENF-nUnxy3p6k-fYKpwPUofnoU1&index=1) to any tune.

Or I would love to make a stage entrance like [the new headmistress in Sex Education](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9p9otNBs8O0&list=PLdIS7dENF-nUnxy3p6k-fYKpwPUofnoU1&index=20&t=1s)

Or just dancy blissfully like [Alexandria Cortez and her goofy friends at Boston Uni](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qj2Xald7NYQ&list=PLdIS7dENF-nUnxy3p6k-fYKpwPUofnoU1&index=14). This is what unburdened, freewheeling happiness with friends looks like.


How does one begin?

----
**Loving your body**

The first thing you have to develop is an ease in your body and your own sense of fun. 


----

**Step into your power** [you've come to be danced](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uLzsaEwZ9tY&list=PLdIS7dENF-nUnxy3p6k-fYKpwPUofnoU1&index=16&t=6s)

You are not dancing to be liked, you are not objectifying your body, you are not shying away in the corner, you are not copying others. 

Instead, you embody the full expression of your life force and let it move you.


----

**Do any movement whatsoever to start**

Then Just Move. This is the "Do Nothing" of ecstatic movement. Ask "How does my body want to move right now?" and just do it. That's the whole instruction.

For most people who have internalized the taboo against joyful movement (which is to say 99.999% of adults in most cultures), this is not enough instruction. Most adults find it impossible to do spontaneous dance without alcohol or drugs for instance.

But keep this instruction in mind for later after you've overcome the embarrassment and shame of moving your body enjoyably. There is something absolutely beautiful and simple in just trusting in your body's wisdom and moving that way. Dance therapy practices like "Authentic Movement" are basically this sparse in their instruction.

One risk of this totally open-ended instruction is some people report not knowing when to stop, or even feeling like they "can't" stop. There's an easy fix for that: set a timer, and then stop when the timer goes off. You're always in control, even if you are temporarily choosing to hand over control.

---

Bounce

Since you can't yet do full spontaneity, some creative constraints or structure can be useful. Here is a simple version I came up with, which can be scaled from as little as 3 minutes to as long as you'd like.

There are 3 phases to this practice: bouncing, shaking, and flowing.

First decide how long to practice. 10 minutes is good for a beginner.

**Bounce**

Begin standing, with feet a comfortable distance apart. Gently bounce up and down by bending your knees. Imagine dissolving or melting all the needless tension from your body and letting it sink into the Earth. 

Importantly, also include your breath here, by taking big inhales and letting it out with a sigh, a long "Ahhhhh" sound, humming, or something else that feels like releasing tension.

You don't need any music for this, just bounce gently and enjoyably.

**Shake**


After a few minutes, or when you feel you've bounced enough, shake out your body more vigorously. This can mean increasing the speed of the bouncing to be faster and more chaotic, or shaking out your arms and legs, or whatever else increases the speed and intensity, including the emotional intensity, really letting out the tension.

Don't tense up too much. Notice where your body is tense and release the tension. This is an important point for avoiding some of the potential risks of this practice. Most of the potential negative side-effects come from tension and forcing. So emphasize shaking to release the tension, not to create more tension.

This phase can get emotional. Some people might experience anger or sadness, maybe even wanting to yell or cry. This is perhaps due to releasing trauma, exiting the "freeze" response. If it's too intense, you can always go back to gentle bouncing, or stop and lie down. That said, intensity is part of what you are working with here too, so it's a balance, where you're learning to experience the intensity of being fully alive, and releasing needless rigidity, but also keeping helpful structure.

During the shaking phase, you can also make sounds, buzz your lips, sing or shout or just blow out air if you want to be quiet but involve your breath. Not everyone has a safe space where they can make weird sounds, so adjust as appropriate to your practice environment.

**Flow**

For the final phase of "flow," start moving around the room as if you are doing tai chi, or swimming in the air, or doing your impression of a hippie at a Grateful Dead concert, moving your feet and arms in a fluid, flowing fashion. Fantastic!

For a beginner, 3 minutes of each phase is enough, then 1 minute of just standing in place feeling the body, or lie down and feel the body. You'll notice a lot more energy and vitality in the body after this practice than before.




----

**5 Rhythms** is a form this: Flow, Staccacto (e.g. Bouncing), Chaos (e.g. Shaking), Lyrical, Stillness

---

**Contact Improvisation**

Each person has a centre of gravity, but when two are in contact, there is one centre of gravity, you move like one four legged animal (hip to hip, or pelvis to pelvis)

A sense of shared balance.
listening, deep curiosity, meet each other in a new way that language does not provide.  

Feel the ground through the other when off the ground. If you lose contact with the ground, you're still listening to it. the feeling of becoming one animal connected at the core and flowing through that. connected, safe. 


[Basic Exercises](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H8JiB2Nv5Qo)


**Rolling**
Floor work—Knowing how to create safety and strength in the body through spirals and rolls.


**Lifting**

Understanding the architecture of the body and how to safely hold and support weight.

**Table**

**Noodles to Extension**

**Sitting Together**


---

**Tango**


Shift Weight to indicate which leg you’re going to move forward.
Don't be tentative - be decisive about your intentions, where to move, so the lady can follow.
Dance to melody, not beats

Conversation of intentions through body.

-----

walking, turning, basic cross, ochos.

holding: like a mirror both of you are looking at. elbow downward, not horizontal. 

Feel the weight - in hands, and frame: dont relax it. thats what directs the follower.

Body like a tank: upper frame rotates.

When you move forward, dont be worried about stepping on the toes of the follower, as they have their fit slid quite backward. Move it next to their feet on the other leg. Land on the heel of your toe.

Stopping: Also, the follower is following your frame, not your legs. The frame only move forwards when you move forward, not when you bring back leg level.
Think of yourself as a pendulum that goes down when moving sideways or forward, up when just shifting weight at the same spot.

---

Touch" (the embrace) as the main communication channel between you and your partner, and that can range from just a pair of arms to the full chest. Any slight pressure or slant off the vertical is perceived as an intention to move in that direction. one of the core training of Tango movement is to learn to discipline the body to not emit unintended signal,


musicality, body mechanics, spacing, navigation

Focus on walking (not moves) and close embrace.


---

Musicality: learn the basic beat format of a tango, milonga and waltz. Be able to pick up the right down beat and be able to walk on the beat with each step. 17 minutes.

as a leader it is me who "does the dance", and the follower is "merely" responding to my decisions (this mindframe was crucial for me to gain confidence to dance with partners other than my wife - previously I was virtually unable to do this on milongas because I - so to speak - "cared too much" about my partner, which made me too nervous and unconfident in my leading).

good posture is crucially important for all elements of dancing (balance, clarity of lead...). Stand tall and keep as much of your body in alignment as possible. This looks nice and avoids lower back ache and neck aches. Common issues are drooping the head with shorter followers or hitching the hips back for space.

Lead with the core (torso), these are the most powerful collection of muscles and closest to your balance points. The longer you can keep your solar plexus pointed to your follower, the stronger their sense of connection is to you.


be more grounded I need to stay longer on the heel of my foot when stepping forward. Balance is supreme. You should be able to stand still on one foot and maintain your balance without assistance for minutes. If you can still stand on one foot, while a wobbly follower does adornos/giros/ganchos without moving you, you're at the level to start learning more advanced moves.

 tango as Legos. Reduced at its simplest expression, tango is composed of only six steps (forward, backward, side steps, pivots). They are your building blocks for your dance. Being a good dancer is all about how you mix and match those six tango blocks

 Tango is not about memorizing a sequence of steps. It’s not like in video games when you had to memorize specific keys to hit to access the special moves or cheats

Tango is about improvisation. One piece of advice a teacher gave me was: for each basic figure (ochos, turns, cross, sacadas, etc) find three different ways to enter and exit the figure. You can go a step further and decompose each basic figure in tango blocks and introduce new steps in between. With that in mind, you’ll be able to create an infinite number of combinations.

Learn a proper choreographed full dance:
nothing will force you to address your own bad habits and the inadequacies of your technique than the demands of needing to eventually arrive at the exact right spot at the exact right time of a song. Instead of trying to lose yourself in the "creative flow" of improvisational dancing, where you are dealing with all the random noise being thrown at you on the social dance floor, you are instead focused on losing yourself in the physical flow of the music, your partner, and your own body. 

The drive forward comes from the pushing off of the toe on the backfoot and landing on the heel of the front foot, is the clearest lead for a forward step and the smoothest walk. Had I learnt this earlier it would've saved me YEARS off my journey, because I had to unlearn my "toe to toe" walk.

"Just Walk" actually means doing simple steps with musicality. Knowing how to dance using only forward/side/back/diagonal steps but knowing how to articulate the music (using syncopation, pauses, accelerations, decelerations, rhythm and melody) means being able to dance with beginners and advanced alike, but keeping them both entertained.

1) Walking forward and backward (mostly as a follower)
2) Side step
3) Turn to the right and left
4) Ochos
5) the Cross

Try to learn to lead and follow these "words" and then string them into "phrases" and you'll be a plenty interesting dance partner. Walking is very important- you'd be surprised how many people aren't even comfortable walking! I have found that a great leader doesn't necessarily do a lot of fancy moves, but will be musical and confident.

https://www.facebook.com/groups/326410939248496/posts/610341814188739/
