---
layout: post-normal
title: Storage
date:   2019-01-15 09:00:11
tag: 
categories: tech
excerpt: 
permalink: /storage
comments: false

---

To store data there is hardware (magnetic disks). The format (e.g. what metadata? access rights etc.) or arrangement on disk  with which this data is stores is called the filesystem. What is stored can be an object or a file. 


There are two ways to store: block and object store. Block storage splits data into files across different locations. There is no metadata associated with it (ownership, description, association etc.) Strong consistency is maintained on change of any data. 


With block storage:
-  Files are split into evenly sized blocks of data, each with its own address (Logical Block Number). unlike file storage – where the data is managed on the file level – data is stored in data blocks.  Several blocks (for example in a SAN system) build a file. A block consists of an address and the SAN application gets the block if it makes an SCSI-Request to this address. The storage application decides then where the data blocks are stored inside the system and on what specific disk or storage medium. How the blocks are combined and how they can be accesses are also decided by the storage application.
-  No additional information (metadata) to provide more context for what that block of data is. Blocks in a SAN do not have metadata that is related to the storage system or application. In other words: Blocks are data segments without description, association or an owner. Everything is handled and controlled by the SAN software. 
    - Because of this SAN and Block storage is often used for performance hungry applications, for example, databased or transactional sites. 
    -  since block storage has essentially no additional storage-side metadata that can be associated with a given block other than the address of that block, performance degrades in geographically distributed systems. The further the block storage gets from the application, the more the performance suffers due to latency issues. 
- Strongly consistent. Strong consistency is needed for real-time systems such as transactional databases that are constantly being written to, but provide limited scalability and reduced availability as a result of hardware failures. Scalability becomes even more difficult within a geographically distributed system. Strong consistency is a requirement, however, whenever a read request must return the most updated version of the data.
- can be directly accessed by the operating system as a mounted drive volume, while object storage cannot do so without significant degradation to performance. The tradeoff here is that, unlike object storage, the storage management overhead of block storage (such as remapping volumes) is relatively nonexistent  Object Storage abstracts the entire management layer,  so the same command using the connector simply returns “Filesystem is Object Storage.” (By the same token, “no storage management overhead” can be a pro; see below.
No storage management overhead for object storage. Unlike HDFS, Cloud Storage requires no routine maintenance such as running checksums on the files, upgrading or rolling back to a previous version of the file system and other administrative tasks. 

If you were to run a command such as “hadoop fsck -files -blocks” against a directory in HDFS, you would see an output of useful information, ranging from status to racks to corrupted blocks.


- You’re likely to encounter block storage in the majority of enterprise workloads; it has a wide variety of uses (as seen by the rise in popularity of SAN arrays). often used for performance hungry applications, for example, databased or transactional sites. Because block level storage devices are accessible as volumes and accessed directly by the operating system, they can perform well for a variety of use cases: 
    - structured database storage
    - random read/write loads (transactional sites)
    - virtual machine file system (VMFS) volumes. 



Downsides: 

Low Scalability Limit on how much data can be stored (because of block size?), and strong constancy requirements ensure scalability is difficult. Scalability becomes even more difficult within a geographically distributed system. 
Low Availability as a result of hardware files.
High Latency. The further the block storage gets from the application, the more the performance suffers due to latency issues.  Performance degrades in geographically distributed systems because of no storage-side metadata. 
Low Throughput

   

Object storage (also known as object-based storage[1]) is a computer data storage architecture that manages data as objects, as opposed to other storage architectures like file systems which manages data as a file hierarchy, and block storage which manages data as blocks within sectors and tracks 

Each object typically includes the data itself, a variable amount of metadata, and a globally unique identifier. Object storage can be implemented at multiple levels, including the device level (object-storage device), the system level, and the interface level. In each case, object storage seeks to enable capabilities not addressed by other storage architectures, like interfaces that can be directly programmable by the application, a namespace that can span multiple instances of physical hardware, and data-management functions like data replication and data distribution at object-level granularity.
Object storage systems allow retention of massive amounts of unstructured data. Object storage is used for purposes such as storing photos on Facebook, songs on Spotify, or files in online collaboration services, such as Dropbox

One of the first object-storage products, Lustre, is used in 70% of the Top 100 supercomputers and ~50% of the Top 500. Lustre is a type of parallel distributed file system, generally used for large-scale cluster computing. The name Lustre is a portmanteau word derived from Linux and cluster. However, unlike block-based distributed filesystems, such as GPFS and PanFS, where the metadata server controls all of the block allocation, the Lustre metadata server is only involved in pathname and permission checks, and is not involved in any file I/O operations, avoiding I/O scalability bottlenecks on the metadata server. 


- Object storage, by contrast, doesn’t split files up into raw blocks of data. Instead, entire clumps of data are stored in, yes, an object that contains the data, metadata, and the unique identifier.  Object storage bundles data along with metadata tags and a unique identifier – applications identify the object via this ID. The metadata is customisable, which means a lot more identifying information for each piece of data can be inputted. Each object is stored in a flat address space, making them much easier to locate and retrieve the data.  
- The many objects inside an object storage system are stored all over the given storage disks. In its pure form object storage can only save one version of a file (object). If a user makes a change another version of the same file is stored as a new object. Due to this, an object storage is a perfect for a backup or archive solution, for example, online video streaming sites.  
- no limit on the type or amount of metadata, which makes object storage powerful and customizable. 
    - Metadata can include anything from the security classification of the file within the object to the importance of the application associated with the information.  
- The main difference between Object storage and other systems is that Object storage has no limit as to how much data can be stored. 
- Object storage systems are eventually consistent. Eventual consistency can provide virtually unlimited scalability. It ensures high availability for data that needs to be durably stored but is relatively static and will not change much, if at all. This is why storing photos, video, and other unstructured data is an ideal use case for object storage systems; it does not need to be constantly altered. 
    - The downside to eventual consistency is that there is no guarantee that a read request returns the most recent version of the data. 
- Additionally, all objects are managed via the application itself. This means that no real file system is needed, as the layer is obsolete. So, when an application sends a storage inquiry to the solution regarding where to store the object, the object is given an address inside the huge storage space and saved there by the application itself.
- However, object storage generally doesn’t provide you with the ability to incrementally edit one part of a file (as block storage does). Objects have to be manipulated as a whole unit, requiring the entire object to be accessed, updated, then re-written in their entirety. That can have performance implications
- We don’t recommend you use object storage for transactional data, especially because of the eventual consistency model outlined previously. 
-  In addition, it’s very important to recognize that object storage was not created as a replacement for NAS file access and sharing; it does not support the locking and sharing mechanisms needed to maintain a single accurately updated version of a file.
- Uses: 
    -  The data that is being stored is changed. A lot of what is being produced now is unstructured data – content or material that will never be changed again. This is where Object storage comes into play.
    - In the enterprise data center, object storage is used for these same types of storage needs, where the data needs to be highly available and highly durable.  
    - Object storage works very well for unstructured data sets where data is generally read but not written-to. Databases in an object storage environment ideally have data sets that are unstructured, where the use cases suggests the data will not require a large number of writes or incremental updates.
        - Static Web content
        - data backups 
        - archival images
        - multimedia (videos, pictures, or music) files are best stored as objects. Anyone who’s stored a picture on Facebook or a song on Spotify has used object storage even if they don’t know it.
    - Geographically distributed back-end storage is another great use case for object storage. The object storages applications present as network storage and support extendable metadata for efficient distribution and parallel access to objects. That makes it ideal for moving your back-end storage clusters across multiple data centers.





